Manuscript (WITHOUT AUTHOR IDENTIFIERS) Click here to view linked References

 
The Home Stretch: County-Level Policy Implementation 

and Regional Financial Development in China 
 
 

Abstract: 
 
Hierarchical structures, where central authorities delegate powers to local 
governments, are ubiquitous but face implementation challenges resulting 
from weak accountability. This study presents one of the first evidence of how 
local officials’ policy implementation affects regional financial development 
in China—a deeply hierarchical polity with a historical struggle to bridge the 
“last mile” of policy execution. We develop a new index of county-level 
Central Financial Policy Implementation Index (CFPI) based on over 6.32 
million news releases of county governments on their websites between 2009 
and 2023. We find that stronger CFPI implementation is positively associated 
with local loan innovation, a proxy for financial development. We further 
document that these effects are more substantial for counties where the 
officials have a finance-related background and stronger promotion incentives. 
The commendation tools used by central governments are also useful in 
improving the efficiency of the implementation. Our paper highlights the 
importance of addressing the “last mile” issue in policy implementation in a 
decentralized administrative system.  

 
Keywords: Financial Development; Policy Implementation; Textual Analysis; 
Government Releases 
JEL Classification: G28, O16, O53, R58 

1 
 



1. Introduction 
Hierarchies—layers of sequential authorities—are ubiquitous in government 

organizations. Government organizations often have a structured system of authority, 
where different levels of officials or decision-makers are organized in a hierarchical 
manner. 

The concept of delegation is closely related to the hierarchical structure and has 
significant implications for governance. In political organizations, delegation often 
involves central government bodies granting powers to local governments to implement 
policies. Although delegation can streamline decision-making processes, it can also 
lead to a lack of accountability (Fan et al., 2009). As suggested by Anderson et al. 
(2019), not all higher-level directives are effectively implemented by lower levels, 
especially those from the central government. This situation is akin to the saying, 
“Heaven is high, and the emperor is far away” (Zhou, 2016). 

While the popular media as well as economic and political literature long stressed 
the importance of accountability (Mookherjee, 2006; Mookherjee, 2015), namely the 
efficient implementation of central policies by the local officials in Hierarchies, 1 
empirical literature has had relatively little to say about it. This is largely due to 
methodological limitations in quantifying local officials’ policy implementation. The 
prior literature usually measures the final performance of local officials, but not their 
implementation intensity. It causes problems for research to empirically understand 
how sub-tier agencies react to top-tier officials, and the mechanism by which 
implementation effort affects the outcome of the hierarchy system  

Understanding the implementation by local officials is important practically. 
“Designing good policies is one thing, implementing them is another”, as suggested by 
the World Bank (Artuc et al., 2020). Developing countries are plagued by inefficient 
administrative systems, which hinder the success of sound policies. It is the main reason 
for the frustrating performance of foreign aid in driving development outcomes in these 

                                                   
1 It stems from agency costs, local capture, monitoring difficulties, and subcontracting inefficiencies 
(Mookherjee, 2006) 

 2 



countries (Artuc et al., 2020). A good way to measure the policy implementation at the 
local official level is to improve their accountability, resource allocation, and 
institutional coherence in decentralized systems. 

This study addresses this gap by examining policy implementation in China, a vast 
and deeply hierarchical polity. It is an ideal laboratory to investigate this issue in China 
for two reasons. First, the central government has struggled with the issue of “directives 
not reaching beyond Zhongnanhai,” a popular saying before 2012 that referred to the 
weak implementation of top-level policies.2 The central government has repeatedly 
emphasized the need to bridge the “last mile” of policy execution, recognizing that even 
the best policies are ineffective without proper implementation. 

Second, and more importantly, measuring local governments’ compliance with 
central policies was difficult in the past, as we lacked structured data to assess the extent 
to which local officials were implementing these policies. Fortunately, with the 
advancement of government digitization, we now have the opportunity to measure local 
governments’ compliance with central policies. Since 2000, county-level governments 
have started to maintain formal official websites and disclose updates on meetings, 
research activities, and personnel changes. Currently, almost all county governments 
have established their own official websites where news releases are posted. We 
manually collected over 6.32 million government news releases from 1,269 counties 
between 2000 and 2023. Using text analysis techniques, we develop a county-level 
Central Financial Policy Implementation Index (CFPI).3 

In this study, we investigate how policy implementation affects county-level 
economic performance. Specifically, we study the relationship between financial policy 
implementation and regional financial development. We focus on the implementation 
of financial policy instead of other policies because financial policy is a central matter, 

                                                   
2 For example, on January 30, 2015, the chairman of Chinese Communist Party, Xi Jinping mentioned 
the need to address the “last mile” in reform promotion during the ninth meeting of the Central Leading 
Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms. On June 29, 2020, during the twenty-first collective 
study session of the 19th Central Political Bureau, Xi emphasized that central and national agencies are 
the “first mile” in implementing the decisions of the central government, while grassroots Party 
organizations represent the “last mile.” 
3 This methodological framework has received attention in recent literature, such as the construction of 
the Geopolitical Risk Index (Caldara and Iacoviello, 2022). 

 3 



with local governments mainly responsible for execution and generally not formulating 
differentiated policies. Financial policymaking in China is under central authority, and 
local governments are mainly responsible for implementing policies with limited 
discretion. Therefore, we can focus more on policy implementation instead of policy 
design by local officials. 

We first investigate the economic consequences of policy implementation at the 
local governmental level. Using our innovatively constructed county-level CFPI 
(Central Financial Policy Index), we explore whether counties’ stronger 
implementation of central financial policies promotes regional financial development, 
measured by local loan innovation. After matching the CFPI with county-level statistics 
and incorporating 7,120 observations from 969 counties between 2009 and 2023, we 
document that a higher level of financial policy implementation is related to higher 
local loan innovation.  

Endogeneity is a potential concern in our analysis, as it may arise from reverse 
causality or unobserved confounding factors. For instance, local political capacity, 
leadership quality, or pre-existing financial infrastructure may affect both the efficiency 
of policy implementation and regional financial outcomes such as loan innovation. 
While we attempt to mitigate this issue by including a comprehensive set of control 
variables, we acknowledge that unobserved heterogeneity may remain. To address this 
concern, we employ an instrumental variable (IV) strategy. Specifically, we exploit the 
exogenous shock to local policy implementation induced by the leadership transition 
following the rotation of the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) 
in 2012. This central political change triggered top-down pressure for policy 
enforcement at the local level. To capture regional variation in responsiveness to this 
policy shock, we further examine the academic backgrounds of county-level 
administrative heads. We argue that regions led by officials with stronger academic 
background are more likely to respond effectively to central directives, thus exhibiting 
differential implementation intensity. This interaction between the 2012 leadership 
transition and the characteristics of local leadership creates exogenous variation in 
financial policy implementation across counties. We use this variation as a source of 
 4 



identification to mitigate endogeneity and strengthen the causal interpretation of our 
findings. 

Lastly, we go a step further by examining how regional features, local officials’ 
characteristics, and central government behavior modify this relationship. Empirical 
results suggest that younger county secretaries or heads of administration with a 
financial background could increase the positive impact of financial policy 
implementation. This indicates that bureaucrats with stronger promotion incentives or 
greater expertise achieve better results. We also find that higher levels of fiscal capacity 
and industrial endowments strengthen the impact of financial policy implementation on 
local financial growth. Furthermore, we find Confucian culture dampens the effects of 
CFPI on financial development, extending the findings of Chen et al. (2022). Finally, 
we find the central government’s commendation tool can amplify the positive impact 
of CFPI on regional financial development, emphasizing the role of the central 
government in improving policy implementation.  

Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First, it relates to the research 
that uses textual analysis techniques to analyze policy texts and quantify government 
attitudes or preferences. This approach stems from a consensus in the literature that 
government policy texts are an important channel for understanding officials’ policies, 
preferences, and positions (Benoit et al., 2009). Existing studies have also utilized party 
manifestos from multiple countries for textual analysis to identify party positions or 
examine policy changes (Tavits, 2007; Linder et al., 2020; Laver, 2014; Gethin et al., 
2022). We have collected a large set of unique county-level government announcement 
text data, which allows us to quantify and compare regional implementation of central 
financial policies. In terms of text analysis methods, we extend textual analysis 
frameworks (Baker et al., 2016; Caldara and Iacoviello, 2022; Agoraki et al., 2022; 
Giglio et al., 2023) to quantify policy implementation, offering a blueprint for future 
research on administrative responsiveness and decentralization. 

Second, our paper is related to the literature on policy implementation in 
administrative systems. One way to improve policy implementation is through 
monitoring, which can be summarized as either post-program monitoring or pre-event 
 5 



monitoring-threat (incentive) schemes (Muralidharan et al., 2021). For example, 
Muralidharan et al. (2021) study how to improve “last-mile” public-service delivery in 
India, specifically policy implementation at the local officials’ level. They find that 
phone-based monitoring of a program improved implementation, leading to a 7.6% 
reduction in the number of farmers who did not receive transfers from the agriculture 
subsidy policy. They argue that the improvement is due to the fact that local officials 
know their efforts can be easily measured by supervisors through phones. Rogger and 
Somani (2023) argue that the layering of hierarchy prevents information acquisition 
and thus deters proper policy implementation. Our paper is among the first studies to 
quantify the implementation intensity of top-tier policies by local officials. By 
constructing this measure, we can study the economic effect of the “last-mile” policy 
implication. 

Our paper is also related to the literature on political hierarchies and 
decentralization. The accountability of local officials to top-level governors is a crucial 
issue, similar to the classical principal-agent problem (Mookherjee, 2006). The cost of 
layering arises when local officials cater to vested local interest groups, resulting in 
corruption and the inability of the central government to effectively supervise through 
a layered structure (Mookherjee, 2015). Many studies compare incentive schemes and 
local officials’ accountability to the central government across different political 
hierarchies, such as the multi-division structure in China and the unitary divisional 
structure in the Soviet Union (Markevich and Zhuravskaya, 2011; Qian and Xu, 1993). 
Another strand of literature examines the accountability of local officials to local 
citizens rather than to higher-level authorities. Some studies find that such bottom-up 
accountability can enhance the provision of public services (Mookherjee, 2015) and 
even reduce civil conflict (Fetzer and Kyburz, 2024). However, Cassidy and 
Velayudhan (2024) argue that these benefits may be limited. They show that the 
proliferation of local governments can hinder economic growth, as the potential gains 
from local responsiveness are offset by reduced economies of scale and diminished 
bureaucratic capacity. In these strands of literatures, few studies have operationalized 
local governments’ responsiveness to top-tier priorities in a quantifiable way. Our 
 6 



implementation intensity measure fills this void, enabling future research to test 
hypotheses about bureaucratic responsiveness and the trade-offs between centralized 
control and local autonomy (Bo and Cheng, 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Li et al., 2016; Wong 
et al., 2017). 

Finally, our paper is also related to the extensive literature analyzing the factors 
influencing financial development, which mainly focuses on political and institutional 
aspects. Political factors include political stability and political institutions (Girma and 
Shortland, 2008; Huang et al., 2010), while institutional factors include the legal system, 
the banking system, and trade policies (Porta et al., 1998; Andrianova et al., 2008; 
Mishkin, 2009; Zhang et al., 2015). We extend this strand of literature by examining 
the role played by central financial policies. We also provide additional evidence that 
in regions with favorable economic endowments, officials with specialization and 
strong promotional incentives achieve optimal economic outcomes in policy 
implementation. This provides valuable insights for future regional efforts to improve 
the implementation of central policies. 

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses measuring 
county effectiveness in implementing central financial policies. Section 3 introduces 
the data and empirical design, Section 4 presents the empirical results, Section 5 reports 
implications for further research, and Section 6 concludes. 

 

2. Text-based Measurement of Financial Policy Implementation 
2.1 Hierarchical Policy Implementation System in China 

The governance system is crucial to China’s development model (Bardhan, 2020). 
To govern a populous and vast country, China’s central government adopts a nested, 
multi-layered administrative structure, in which higher levels of government manage 
and supervise lower levels, thus extending the central government’s control throughout 
various regions (Jia et al., 2021). A distinctive feature of China’s political hierarchy is 
the complete subordination of lower levels to higher ones, with the upper echelons 
wielding greater power, because they determine the career paths of lower-level officials 

 7 



(Xu, 2011; Lee, 2024) 
In line with this objective, China’s administrative hierarchy is divided into four 

vertical levels: the central government, provincial governments, prefectural 
governments, and county governments (Han and Wu, 2024). The central government 
formulates national plans, followed by provincial and prefectural governments that 
create their plans, with GDP growth targets as prime examples (Li et al., 2019). 
Provincial and prefectural governments also function as intermediaries, transmitting 
governance tasks both upwards and downwards, ultimately placing a heavy burden on 
grassroots governments, namely county-level governments (Li et al., 2016).  

The primary problem in China’s hierarchical governance system, lies in the “last 
mile” challenge of policy implementation—a systemic disconnect between central 
directives and effective execution at lower administrative levels (Bardhan, 2016; 
Markevich and Zhuravskaya, 2011). This issue stems from the interrelated tension 
within the hierarchical system. Centralized systems struggle to balance delegating 
authority for local responsiveness while maintaining oversight to prevent mission drift 
(Zhou, 2016). As decision-making power diffuses downward, agents gain flexibility to 
address local complexities but may deviate from collective goals due to asymmetric 
incentives. Simultaneously, rigid institutional frameworks often fail to accommodate 
decentralized execution, creating implementation bottlenecks that undermine both 
policy fidelity and adaptive innovation. Therefore, improving the effectiveness of 
governance is the main goal of China’s hierarchical governance system. 
2.2 Text-Based Policy Analysis Review 

Policy texts are not just scripts but vessels for political phenomena. They are 
essential channels for understanding politicians’ attitudes, positions, and relationships 
(Benoit et al., 2009). Therefore, to understand administrative officials’ thoughts and 
policy directions, it is crucial to understand their statements and actions (Grimmer and 
Stewart, 2013). However, prior research acknowledges that the vast array of political 
texts, including policy documents, official announcements, and programmatic writings, 
poses significant challenges for analysis, especially quantitative analysis. 

With advances in textual analysis techniques, researchers are increasingly 
 8 



undertaking systematic studies of large political texts. These studies fall into three 
categories. First, political texts are used to analyze party positions quantitatively. For 
instance, Gethin et al. (2022) analyze party manifestos from 21 countries before general 
elections, categorizing the content into income distribution and socio-cultural issues 
and scoring the party stances. Similarly, Laver (2014) summarizes the attributes of these 
manifestos that represent party positions. Second, several studies focus on the content 
of policy texts, analyzing changes in the policy philosophies of parties or governments, 
such as policy bill similarity or shifts in party policies (Tavits, 2007; Linder et al., 2020). 
The third category of literature focuses on novel techniques for policy text analysis, 
such as the Wordscores technology and the WORDFISH algorithm (Lowe, 2008; Slapin 
and Proksch, 2008). 

There is also a strand of literature focusing on Chinese policy documents, given 
that China is largely driven by political decisions. The previous literature mainly 
focuses on the effects of specific policies. For example, the ecological benefits of the 
Natural Forest Conservation Program (NFCP) and the Grain-to-Green Program (GTGP) 
(Liu et al., 2008), the policy characteristics of China’s Medium- and Long-Term Plan 
for the Development of Science and Technology (2006-2020) (Liu et al., 2011), and the 
institutional and ecological perspective evaluation of China’s “ecological red line” 
policy (Bai et al., 2018). In the financial domain, Klingelhöfer and Sun (2019) derive 
macroprudential policy indicators, while Das and Song (2023) extract precise 
timestamps of monetary policy events to reveal the complexity of monetary policy 
transmission to interest rates. 
2.3 Central Financial Policy Implementation (CFPI) Index 

In this study, we focus on the implementation of central financial policies for two 
reasons. Firstly, financial policy is a unique national policy. Its formulation is mainly 
the central government’s responsibility, with local governments having limited power 
in this area. County-level governments mainly implement these policies, reducing 
concerns about conflating policy formulation with policy implementation.4 Secondly, 

                                                   
4 In the 7th issue of the official policy research of the People's Bank of China in 2020, titled 'Design and 

 9 



financial policy is a particularly dynamic area for the Chinese central government, 
characterized by frequent policy changes to actively respond to short-term market 
fluctuations (Brunnermeier et al., 2022). 
2.3.1 Data source of policy texts 

To construct an indicator of county-level government implementation of central 
financial policies, we need to obtain comprehensive and comparable policy texts from 
county-level governments that reflect their proactivity in executing these policies. 
Therefore, we collect government releases from the official websites of county-level 
governments, accumulating approximately 6.32 million texts from 2000 to 2023, 
covering 1,269 counties.5 6 Figure 1 illustrates the geographical distribution of the 
counties from which we obtain data, showing that the sampled counties are spread 
across various regions and provinces in China, rather than being concentrated in 
financially developed areas or eastern coastal cities. This helps to alleviate concerns 
about the robustness of our conclusions due to our sample’s uneven distribution. 

[PLEASE INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE] 

In May 2008, China’s highest administrative authority, the State Council, officially 
implemented the Regulations on Government Information Disclosure, which mandated 
county-level and above governments to increase transparency. As part of this initiative, 
most county-level governments in China established official websites (Chen et al., 

                                                   
Effect Analysis of the Coordination Mechanism between Central and Local Financial Regulation,' it is 
explicitly stated that 'financial management is mainly a central authority, and local financial supervision 
serves as an effective supplement.' 
5 Specifically, obtaining the government releases involves several steps. First, we identify the official 
websites of all counties. We start by gathering the official websites of all prefecture-level cities, which 
typically provide links to the websites of their subordinate counties, ensuring comprehensive coverage 
of all county government websites. Second, we locate the sub links for government releases. This step is 
the most time-consuming, as we manually identify the module names for government releases on each 
website. Depending on the website, this module could be named differently, such as “Updates”, 
“Important News”, “Government Activities”, “Local Headlines”, or “Today’s News”. Third, we collect 
all texts from the government releases modules. 
6 The total number of county in China is 1301. A small number of government releases from certain 
counties is missing, due to restrictions on access to website data, the absence of a government releases 
module, or an insufficient volume of texts. 

 10 



2016). Before this, county-level governments didn’t need to establish official websites 
and release information. To address the sample bias caused by the lack of compulsory 
information release, our analysis only includes government release data from 2009 to 
2023, including approximately 6.22 million texts from 1,269 counties, representing 
over 98.4% of the total data collected. The blue bars in Figure 2 depict the average 
number of government release texts per county by year, revealing a significant increase 
in the average number of texts after the implementation of the regulations compared to 
the period before. 

[PLEASE INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE] 

2.3.2 CFPI Measure construction 
To achieve our research objectives, we adopt a dictionary-based approach by 

constructing a dictionary containing terms that reflect the central financial policies of 
county-level governments. Following the methodologies of dictionary-based index 
construction in the literature (Baker et al., 2016; Azzimonti, 2019), we first identify 
three sets of terms representing the categories of ‘central (C)’, ‘financial policy (FP)’, 
and ‘implementation (I)’. Government releases must contain terms from all three 
categories to meet our criteria. Since our research objective is not directly observable 
and no data is available to train a supervised model, supervised or unsupervised 
algorithms or predefined dictionary methods are less suitable (Caldara and Iacoviello, 
2022). We have designed a rigorous process to construct the index, as illustrated in 
Figure 3, which we will detail step by step. 

[PLEASE INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE] 

How do we specify the terms for our dictionary? As shown by Baker et al. (2016) 
and Azzimonti (2019), commonly used methods often involve some degree of 
subjectivity in determining the vocabulary content. In contrast, our paper posits that 
such subjective judgment may introduce bias into the index construction. To address 
this potential problem, we adopt a relatively objective method to create the term sets. 

The Chinese central government’s official website provides an excellent material 

 11 



source through its Government Information Disclosure module. This module 
categorizes policy documents at the central level, including those from State Council 
agencies, are categorized. Figure A1 shows the original website, which includes a 
category labelled ‘Fiscal, Financial, and Auditing’. We first obtain all the policy texts 
under this category and split the texts into individual words, removing high-frequency 
but meaningless words such as “below” or “also”, as well as common non-financial 
terms such as “government”. We then count the frequency of the remaining words, 
retaining the high-frequency words and categorizing them into the three predetermined 
sets of terms. During this process, words unrelated to these three categories are 
excluded. The final term sets are shown in Table 1. This method of constructing the 
term sets effectively avoids the bias introduced by human intervention, thereby 
enhancing the replicability and credibility of the index construction. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 1 HERE] 

After determining the term sets, we scan all the government release texts. 
Following Baker et al. (2016) and Azzimonti (2019), we search for texts containing at 
least one keyword from each of the three categories, requiring the co-occurrence of 
these keywords. Texts that meet this criterion are labelled as CFPI-related government 
releases. From 2009 to 2023, there are approximately 0.55 million CFPI-related 
government releases, accounting for approximately 8.8% of all government releases. 
The black line graph in Figure 2 shows the annual average proportion of CFPI-related 
government releases. It can be seen that the proportion fluctuates significantly before 
2008 due to the smaller number of texts, but stabilizes after 2009. The proportion is 
significantly higher during the 2008-2009 financial crisis and has shown an upward 
trend since 2020.  

To measure the county-level implementation of central financial policies, we 
calculate the CFPI index using the following formula: 

CFPI − Related Government Releases
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 =  
Government Releases (1) 

𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

where we obtain the CFPI index by calculating the proportion of CFPI-related 

 12 



government releases to the total number of government releases for county i in year t. 
By using the total number of releases to scale the CFPI-related releases, we could avoid 
biases introduced by the varying sizes of counties. 
 

3. Data and Empirical Strategy 
3.1 Data and Sample 

Based on the government release data of 1,269 county-level websites obtained in 
Section 2.3, we first limit our research sample to these 1,269 counties from 2009 to 
2023. We then collect statistical data for the sampled counties. Due to differences in 
statistical data collection methods, there are missing values in the different county 
databases. To construct a more complete county-level panel data, we primarily source 
county-level statistics from the CEInet database7, and supplement missing values from 
the China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database and the Chinese 
Research Data Services (CNRDS) platform where possible. To construct the panel data 
for the empirical analysis, we match the CFPI data with the county-level statistical data 
and exclude samples that lack financial development indicators. This process yields 
7,120 county-year observations across 969 counties.  
3.2 Main Variables 

We examine the relationship between the county-level government 
implementation of central financial policies and regional financial development. 
Section 2.3 and Equation (1) have already explained the construction and calculation 
of the core independent variable, namely the CFPI index. To measure county-level 
financial development, we refer to the approaches of Zhang et al. (2012) and Zhang et 
al. (2015). Given the availability of county-level financial statistical data, we introduce 
the ratio of financial institutions’ loan balances to GDP as the dependent variable. 

To control for potential factors influencing county-level financial development, 

                                                   
7 This comprehensive database consolidates information from regional statistical yearbooks and the 
“China County Statistical Yearbook,” providing statistical data on county-level investment, consumption, 
and finance, covering nearly all counties nationwide. 

 13 



we introduce three categories of control variables. First, we include county-level 
economic variables (Han and Wu, 2024; Guo et al., 2016), such as the share of GDP 
from the primary sector (Primary GDP Share), GDP growth rate (GDP Growth), and 
population growth rate (Population Growth). Second, we also incorporate fiscal 
variables (Bu and Liao, 2022; Fan et al., 2012), including the ratio of general public 
fiscal budget expenditure to general public fiscal budget revenue (Expenditure Ratio), 
per capita general public fiscal budget expenditure (Per Capita Expenditure), and the 
natural logarithm of general public fiscal budget expenditure (lnExpenditure). Finally, 
we include demographic variables (Faber, 2014; Guo et al., 2025), namely the ratio of 
the number of students enrolled in junior and senior high schools to the total population 
(Students Ratio), as well as the ratio of the total population to the land area (People 
Density). The main variables and their definitions are presented in Table 2. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 2 HERE] 

Panel A in Table 3 presents the summary statistics of the main variables. The mean 
and median of the dependent variable, Financial Development, are approximately 0.85 
and 0.49, respectively. The core independent variable, CFPI, has a mean of around 0.10 
and a median of about 0.07. On average, the sample counties have a primary sector 
GDP proportion of about 18.43%. The GDP and population growth rates are about 8.90% 
and 0.14%, respectively. In Panel B in Table 3, we further divide the sample by GDP 
Growth, People Density, and Year, and report the descriptive statistics of CFPI for each 
subsample. It can be observed that counties with lower population density and higher 
GDP growth tend to have a slightly higher mean CFPI. Additionally, the mean CFPI 
has increased over time. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 3 HERE] 

3.3 Empirical Strategy 
To identify the impact of county-level government implementation of central 

financial policies on regional financial development, we introduce the following 
reduced-form model: 

 14 



𝐶𝐶𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 = 𝛼𝛼0 + 𝛼𝛼1𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝑿𝑿′𝜸𝜸 + 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖 + 𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 (2) 
where 𝑿𝑿 stands for the vector of control variables mentioned in Section 3.2. 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖 and 
𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡  represent county and year fixed effects, respectively. 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡  is the error term, and 
standard errors are clustered at the county level to address potential heteroskedasticity 
and serial correlation. The coefficient of interest, 𝛼𝛼1 , captures the influence of 
implementation capacity on regional financial development. 
 

4. Empirical Findings 
4.1 Main Results 

Table 4 reports our main regression results. Column (1) includes only the core 
independent variable CFPI. Column (2) further introduces county fixed effects and year 
fixed effects. Column (3) adds county-level economic control variables, and column (4) 
incorporates additional control variables. It can be observed that the coefficient 
estimates for CFPI are significantly positive, at least at the 5% level in all columns. 
Focusing on column (4), the coefficient estimate for CFPI is 0.1417, indicating that a 
1% increase in county-level implementation of central financial policies corresponds to 
an approximate 0.14% improvement in regional financial development. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 4 HERE] 

Several studies have confirmed that local government actions, including 
legislation and credit policies, can significantly influence regional financial 
development (Allen et al., 2005). Our results show that county-level governments with 
strong financial policy implementation capabilities can effectively bridge the “last mile” 
for implementing central financial policies. In such cases, central financial policies can 
effectively guide regional financial development in a positive direction. By enhancing 
their implementation capabilities, regions can improve the quality and efficiency of 
their financial development.  
4.2 Instrumental Variable Results 

There may be potential bias issues related to our econometric estimations. On the 
one hand, the regression variables are based on historical data, which may be subject to 
 15 



measurement error. On the other hand, the results could be biased by unobserved 
confounding factors (Narciso and Severgnini, 2023). There may be unobserved factors 
that influence both the level of policy implementation and financial innovation. For 
example, local political capacity, leadership quality, or pre-existing financial 
infrastructure could simultaneously affect CFPI scores and loan innovation outcomes. 
If such variables are not adequately controlled for, the estimated effect of CFPI could 
be biased. 

To address these potential issues, we construct instrumental variables based on the 
rotation of the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) in 2012. Since 
the 18th CPC National Congress, China has emphasized addressing the “last mile” 
problem in policy implementation, aiming to overcome the problem that Directives do 
not reach beyond Zhongnanhai. It caused an exogenous shock on the extent to which 
county-level officials implement the central government’s policies. We introduce a 
dummy variable Post, which takes the value of 1 for years after 2012 and 0 otherwise.  

It should be noted that the 2012 transition constitutes a one-time policy shock and, 
by itself, may not provide sufficient identification in a regional setting. To capture 
cross-regional variation in responsiveness to this shock, we further examine the 
academic backgrounds of county-level administrative heads. We argue that counties led 
by officials with stronger academic or technocratic credentials are more likely to 
respond effectively to central directives. Following the approach proposed by Geng et 
al. (2023), we construct the variable Finance Degree, which captures whether a county-
level administrative head holds a formal academic qualification in finance. Specifically, 
the variable takes the value of 1 if the official has an undergraduate or graduate degree 
in finance, and 0 otherwise. The interaction term Post × Finance Degree thus captures 
exogenous variation in policy implementation intensity across regions, providing a 
more credible identification strategy to address endogeneity concerns. 

Using the introduced instrumental variables (IV), we perform a two-stage least 
squares (2SLS) regression, with results reported in Table 5. Columns (1) and (2) do not 
include control variables, while columns (3) and (4) incorporate them. All columns 
control for year and county fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the county 
 16 



level. Columns (1) and (3) present the first-stage regression results, and columns (2) 
and (4) present the second-stage regression results. The first-stage results indicate that 
the IVs are jointly significant (with F-statistics greater than 3), suggesting a strong 
correlation between the IVs and county-level implementation of central financial 
policies. The second-stage results show that the coefficient estimates for the core 
independent variable are significant, at least at the 5% level in all specifications, 
supporting the view that higher CFPI is associated with higher levels of regional 
financial development. Therefore, the results in Table 5 further confirm the causality 
between county-level implementation of central financial policies and regional 
financial development. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 5 HERE] 

4.3 Robustness Checks 

To ensure the robustness of our study’s main results, we conduct several tests based 

on the financial development literature, such as Zhang et al. (2015). 
First, we consider concerns about reverse causality and the lagged effects of policy 

implementation. In the baseline regression, a natural question arises: Do counties with 
higher levels of financial development also exhibit stronger implementation of central 
financial policies? This potential issue suggests the presence of reverse causality. To 
further address endogeneity caused by reverse causality and to account for the potential 
lagged effects of policy implementation on regional financial development, we 
introduce Financial Developmenti,t+1 as the dependent variable. The results are reported 
in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6. Even with these considerations, the coefficient 
estimates of the core independent variable remain significantly positive at the 5% level. 
This finding further confirms our main conclusion that county-level implementation of 
central financial policies positively impacts regional financial development. 

Second, we consider the impact of counties governed by municipalities directly 
under the central government. On one hand, these counties differ significantly in 
administrative rank compared to other samples. On the other hand, these counties 
typically exhibit better economic conditions and higher levels of financial development.  
 17 



Our baseline regression already includes county-level fixed effects to mitigate the 
impact of sample variability. However, as a robustness check, we further exclude these 
counties from the sample to address potential biases in causal identification. The results 
are presented in columns (3) and (4) of Table 6. The regression results indicate that, 
after excluding these counties, the significance and magnitude of the coefficient 
estimates remain consistent with the baseline regression results. This suggests that the 
counties governed by directly administered municipalities do not affect the baseline 
regression results, further confirming our main conclusion. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 6 HERE] 
 

5. Modification factors 
We have already provided evidence that a stronger implementation of central 

financial policies by local governments can improve regional financial development. 
However, how regional features, local officials’ characteristics, and central government 
behavior modify this relationship remains underexplored. These factors are important 
because they provide implications for improving the efficiency of policy 
implementation. We investigate them in this section. 
 

5.1 The Effects of Specialized Bureaucracy 
The implementation of financial policies fundamentally relies on the specific 

actions of key local officials (Tukiainen et al., 2024). This raises the question: Do the 
characteristics of these officials, especially those with a background in finance, affect a 

county’s effectiveness in implementing central financial policies? We manually collect 

information on the sample counties’ party secretaries and administrative heads from 

online sources, including their names, birthdates, academic backgrounds, and 
educational levels. We have collected data on 2,508 party secretaries and 2,586 
administrative heads. 

First, we examine how officials’ financial academic background influences the 

 18 



effectiveness of financial policy implementation on regional financial development. If 
either the Party Secretary or the Chief Administrator in a given year has a finance-
related degree, we assign a value of 1 to the variable Finance Degree; otherwise, it is 
assigned a value of 0. We interact it with the variable CFPI, and the regression results 
are shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 7. The interaction term is significantly 
positive at the 5% level. This suggests that when the Secretary or Chief Administrator 
has a financial background, the impact of CFPI on regional financial development is 
greater. These findings offer some interesting insights: while local governments can 
actively enhance the implementation of central financial policies, the professional 
expertise of leadership significantly affects the effectiveness of such implementation. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 7 HERE] 

Additionally, we further investigate how the officials’ age and highest educational 
level influences the effectiveness of central financial policy implementation, which has 
been documented in the existing literature (Su et al., 2012). Based on the personal 
information of local officials, we construct two variables, Young and Master. If both the 
party secretary and the administrative head are under 50 years old, Young equals 1. If 
either the party secretary or administrative head has a master’s degree or higher, Master 
equals 1. By introducing the interaction terms Young × CFPI and Master × CFPI, the 
results are shown in Table 7. The findings indicate that when both the party secretary 
and administrative head are under 50 years old, the positive impact of CFPI on regional 
financial development is enhanced, while the influence on educational level is not 
significant. If these officials have strong promotion incentives, they can address the 
“last mile” problem to promote regional financial development, and better 
implementation outcomes are achieved, in line with administrative tournament theory. 
5.2 The County Endowment Matters 

Regional endowment can also influence the effective implementation of financial 
policies and their outcomes. While previous sections treat the endowment of all 
counties as homogeneous, there are significant endowment differences among counties. 
Specifically, such an effect may be influenced by local endowments, including fiscal 

 19 



capacity, and the mix of industries.  
First, we assess the fiscal capacity endowment of county governments. We 

introduce Group(Per Capita Expenditure)i,t, which takes a value of 1 if the per capita 
fiscal expenditure of county i in year t exceeds the median, indicating a sample with 
higher fiscal capacity, and 0 otherwise. Column (2) of Table 8 reports the results of this 
test. The coefficient estimate of the interaction term is significantly positive at the 10% 
level, indicating that stronger fiscal capacity enhances the benefits of implementing 
financial policies at the county level. 

Second, we consider the local industry mix. The development of the county’s 
secondary industry could affect policy implementation effiiciency. We measure the 
strength of the secondary industry by using the ratio of total industrial output to GDP 
and the proportion of the labor force in the secondary industry. By introducing dummy 
variables to divide the sample into two categories and adding interaction terms, we find 
that the better the secondary industry endowment, the stronger the positive effect of 
CFPI on financial development. As noted by Haraguchi et al. (2019), the opportunities 
for manufacturing development and its importance to economic growth have not 
diminished. Similarly, Liu et al. (2020) found that manufacturing provides demand for 
financial services. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 8 HERE] 

5.3 The Impact of Regional Culture 
The effectiveness of a county’s implementation capacity for central financial 

policies could hinge on regional culture, especially the Confucian culture. Unlike 
Western cultural traditions, under the influence of Confucian culture, China has relied 
on clan systems and kinship ethics to achieve cooperation among relatives since the 
Han Dynasty (Greif and Tabellini, 2017; Cheng et al., 2024). Chen et al. (2022) found 
that deeply rooted Confucian family traditions have historically stifled and continue to 
inhibit the demand and supply of external financing in China.  

To test whether Confucian culture influences the impact of CFPI on financial 
development, we consider Confucian temples as important physical carriers of 

 20 



Confucian ideology. These temples play a significant role in educating local residents 
about Confucian ethics (Kung and Ma, 2014). We introduce the proxy variable 
Group(Confucian), which takes a value of 1 if the number of Confucian temples in the 
province where the county is located exceeds the median, and 0 otherwise. Additionally, 
Chen et al. (2022) argued that Zhu Xi (1130-1200 AD) played a crucial role in spreading 
the Confucian lifestyle at the grassroots level by encouraging clans to establish 
ancestral halls, with Zhu Xi academies becoming centers for propagating 
operationalized Confucianism. Thus, we introduce another proxy variable 
Group(Shuyuan), which takes a value of 1 if the number of Zhu Xi academies in the 
province where the county is located exceeds the median, and 0 otherwise. 

[PLEASE INSERT TABLE 9 HERE] 

After introducing the interaction terms between these two variables and CFPI, the 
regression results are presented in Table 9. The results show that the coefficient 
estimates for the interaction terms are significantly negative. This indicates that, 
consistent with the findings of Chen et al. (2022), the stronger the presence of 
Confucian culture in a county, the more the positive effect of CFPI on financial 
development is curbed. 

5.4 Central Government Commendations 
Since the 18th National Congress, the central government has designed top-level 

frameworks to improve policy implementation, exemplified by the State Council’s 
office conducting inspections and rewarding effective regions. Since 2016, the State 
Council annually evaluates the impact of major policy measures across regions and 
rewards regions for effective policy implementation. Specifically, regarding financial 
policy, 5–6 provinces are commended annually for their enthusiasm, initiative, and 
creativity in financial policy implementation. 8 

                                                   
8 Since 2016, the policy to increase incentives and support for regions with effective implemen
tation has been in effect. The document can be accessed at https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/
2016/content_5145564.htm. In 2018, the policy was further intensified, and the document can b
e accessed at https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2018/content_5350045.htm. In 2021, the superv

 21 



 [PLEASE INSERT TABLE 10 HERE] 

Thus, we set a dummy variable, Practice. If the county’s province received 
incentives in a given year, it is coded as 1; otherwise, it is 0. Based on publicly available 
information, we only collect the lists of 31 provinces that were commended from 2016 
to 2021.9 In columns (1) and (2) of Table 10, we first introduce the dummy variable 
Practice alone, without CFPI. Column (1) uses the same sample as the main regression, 
while column (2) extends the sample to the annual panel data of all sample counties. 
Considering that commendations are for past performance, all dependent variables in 
Table 10 are lagged by one year. The results show that the variable Practice 
significantly enhances regional financial development, confirming the positive effect 
of central commendations on regional policy implementation. Columns (3) and (4) 
further introduce the interaction term between Practice and CFPI. The results show that 
the interaction term is significantly positive, indicating that the central government’s 
commendations amplify the positive impact of CFPI on regional financial development. 
 

6. Conclusions 
This paper addresses a critical gap in empirical literature by quantifying the 

intensity of local officials’ policy implementation using text analysis of over 6.32 
million county-level government news releases (2000–2023). Constructing a novel 
Central Financial Policy Implementation Index (CFPI) provides a granular measure of 
how effectively local governments execute central financial policies, a task previously 
hindered by methodological limitations. 

                                                   
ision and incentive measures were further strengthened, and the document can be accessed at h
ttps://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-12/20/content_5662066.htm. 
9 The provinces commended by the General Office of the State Council for effective implementation of 
financial policies were as follows: In 2016, Fujian, Shandong, Shanghai, Sichuan, and Zhejiang were 
commended. In 2017, the commended provinces were Guangdong, Guizhou, Henan, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, 
and Chongqing. For 2018, the provinces included Guangdong, Hebei, Hubei, Jiangsu, and Chongqing. 
In 2019, Guangdong, Jiangxi, Shanghai, Sichuan, and Zhejiang were recognized. The year 2020 saw 
Beijing, Guangdong, Jiangsu, Shandong, and Zhejiang being commended. Finally, in 2021, Beijing, 
Jiangsu, Shandong, Shanghai, and Zhejiang were the commended provinces. 

 22 



Specifically, we investigate how county effectiveness in implementing central 
financial policies impacts regional financial development. Our findings indicate that the 
more effectively counties implement central financial policies, the higher the level of 
regional financial development. It reveals that stronger implementation drives higher 
local loan innovation, underscoring the importance of “last-mile” execution in 
economic development. 

We also analyze the impacts of official characteristics, regional culture, and the 
central government’s commendation scheme. First, when officials have a background 
in finance and stronger promotion incentives, the CFPI has a greater impact on regional 
financial development. Second, regional endowments, particularly fiscal capacity and 
industrial structure, significantly influence the effectiveness of financial policy 
implementation. Third, in areas with a stronger Confucian culture, the effects of the 
CFPI are suppressed. Fourth, the central government’s commendation tool can amplify 
the positive impact of CFPI on regional financial development. 

While existing literature extensively analyzes economic and political drivers of 
financial development, most studies rely on international data or focus on 
provincial/municipal levels. Our paper uniquely examines the “last mile” of policy 
implementation at the county level, identifying factors influencing local financial 
development and revealing how regional governance shapes policy outcomes. Given 
China’s top-down policy framework, this research helps to advance our understanding 
of hierarchical governance and provides actionable strategies for policymakers seeking 
to bridge the “last mile” of policy execution, particularly in decentralized systems. 

 

References 
[1] Agoraki, M. E. K., Aslanidis, N., & Kouretas, G. P. (2022). US banks’ lending, 

financial stability, and text-based sentiment analysis. Journal of Economic 
Behavior & Organization, 197, 73-90. 

[2] Allen, F., Qian, J., & Qian, M. (2005). Law, finance, and economic growth in China. 
Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1), 57-116. 

 23 



[3] Anderson, S. E., Buntaine, M. T., Liu, M., & Zhang, B. (2019). Non-governmental 
monitoring of local governments increases compliance with central mandates: A 
national-scale field experiment in China. American Journal of Political Science, 
63(3), 626-643. 

[4] Andrianova, S., Demetriades, P., & Shortland, A. (2008). Government ownership 
of banks, institutions, and financial development. Journal of Development 
Economics, 85(1-2), 218-252. 

[5] Artuc, E., Cull, R., Dasgupta, S., Fattal, R., Filmer, D., Giné, X., ... & Woolcock, 
M. (2020). Toward successful development policies: Insights from research in 
development economics. 

[6] Azzimonti, M. (2019). Does partisan conflict deter FDI inflows to the US? Journal 
of International Economics, 120, 162-178. 

[7] Bai, Y., Wong, C. P., Jiang, B., Hughes, A. C., Wang, M., & Wang, Q. (2018). 
Developing China’s ecological redline policy using ecosystem services 
assessments for land use planning. Nature Communications, 9(1), 3034. 

[8] Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., & Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring economic policy 
uncertainty. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1593-1636. 

[9] Bardhan, P. (2016). State and development: The need for a reappraisal of the 
current literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 54(3), 862-892. 

[10] Bardhan, P. (2020). The Chinese governance system: Its strengths and weaknesses 
in a comparative development perspective. China Economic Review, 61, 101430. 

[11] Benoit, K., Laver, M., & Mikhaylov, S. (2009). Treating words as data with error: 
Uncertainty in text statements of policy positions. American Journal of Political 
Science, 53(2), 495-513. 

[12] Bo, S., & Cheng, C. (2021). Political hierarchy and urban primacy: Evidence from 
China. Journal of Comparative Economics, 49(4), 933-946. 

[13] Brunnermeier, M. K., Sockin, M., & Xiong, W. (2022). China’s model of managing 
the financial system. The Review of Economic Studies, 89(6), 3115-3153. 

[14] Bu, D., & Liao, Y. (2022). Land property rights and rural enterprise growth: 
Evidence from land titling reform in China. Journal of Development Economics, 

 24 



157, 102853. 
[15] Caldara, D., & Iacoviello, M. (2022). Measuring geopolitical risk. American 

Economic Review, 112(4), 1194-1225. 
[16] Cassidy, Traviss, Tejaswi Velayudhan (2024). Government fragmentation and 

economic growth. Review of Economics and Statistics, 1-46. 
[17] Chen, J., Pan, J., & Xu, Y. (2016). Sources of authoritarian responsiveness: A field 

experiment in China. American Journal of Political Science, 60(2), 383-400. 
[18] Chen, Z., Ma, C., & Sinclair, A. J. (2022). Banking on the Confucian clan: Why 

China developed financial markets so late. The Economic Journal, 132(644), 1378-
1413. 

[19] Cheng, M., Fan, Z., Feng, C., & Tian, B. (2024). Cultural norms and tax 
compliance: Evidence from China. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 
227, 106720. 

[20] Das, S., & Song, W. (2023). Monetary policy transmission and policy coordination 
in China. China Economic Review, 82, 102032. 

[21] Faber, B. (2014). Trade integration, market size, and industrialization: Evidence 
from China’s National Trunk Highway System. Review of Economic Studies, 
81(3), 1046-1070. 

[22] Fan, C. S., Lin, C., & Treisman, D. (2009). Political decentralization and corruption: 
Evidence from around the world. Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2), 14-34. 

[23] Fan, S., Li, L., & Zhang, X. (2012). Challenges of creating cities in China: Lessons 
from a short-lived county-to-city upgrading policy. Journal of Comparative 
Economics, 40(3), 476-491. 

[24] Fetzer, Thiemo, Stephan Kyburz (2024). Cohesive institutions and political 
violence. Review of Economics and Statistics 106, 133-150. 

[25] Geng, C., Li, D., Sun, J., & Yuan, C. (2023). Functional distance and bank loan 
pricing: Evidence from the opening of high-speed railway in China. Journal of 
Banking & Finance, 149, 106810. 

[26] Gethin, A., Martínez-Toledano, C., & Piketty, T. (2022). Brahmin left versus 
merchant right: Changing political cleavages in 21 western democracies, 1948-

 25 



2020. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137(1), 1-48. 
[27] Giglio, S., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., & Zeng, X. (2023). Biodiversity risk (No. 

w31137). National Bureau of Economic Research. 
[28] Girma, S., & Shortland, A. (2008). The political economy of financial development. 

Oxford Economic Papers, 60(4), 567-596. 
[29] Greif, A., & Tabellini, G. (2017). The clan and the corporation: Sustaining 

cooperation in China and Europe. Journal of Comparative Economics, 45(1), 1-35. 
[30] Grimmer, J., & Stewart, B. M. (2013). Text as data: The promise and pitfalls of 

automatic content analysis methods for political texts. Political Analysis, 21(3), 
267-297. 

[31] Guo, N., Huang, W., & Wang, R. (2025). Public pensions and family dynamics: 
Eldercare, child investment, and son preference in rural China. Journal of 
Development Economics, 172, 103390. 

[32] Guo, Q., Liu, C., & Ma, G. (2016). How large is the local fiscal multiplier? 
Evidence from Chinese counties. Journal of Comparative Economics, 44(2), 343-
352. 

[33] Han, Y., & Wu, M. (2024). Inter-regional barriers and economic growth: Evidence 
from China. Journal of Development Economics, 167, 103197. 

[34] Haraguchi, N., Cheng, C. F. C., & Smeets, E. (2017). The importance of 
manufacturing in economic development: Has this changed? World Development, 
93, 293-315. 

[35] Huang, Y. (2010). Political institutions and financial development: An empirical 
study. World Development, 38(12), 1667-1677. 

[36] Jia, J., Liang, X., & Ma, G. (2021). Political hierarchy and regional economic 
development: Evidence from a spatial discontinuity in China. Journal of Public 
Economics, 194, 104352. 

[37] Klingelhöfer, J., & Sun, R. (2019). Macroprudential policy, central banks and 
financial stability: Evidence from China. Journal of International Money and 
Finance, 93, 19-41. 

[38] Kung, J. K. S., & Ma, C. (2014). Can cultural norms reduce conflicts? 
 26 



Confucianism and peasant rebellions in Qing China. Journal of Development 
Economics, 111, 132-149. 

[39] Laver, M. (2014). Measuring policy positions in political space. Annual Review of 
Political Science, 17, 207-223. 

[40] Lee, M. Y. (2024). Enacting decentralized authority: The practices and limits of 
moving beyond hierarchy. Administrative Science Quarterly, forthcoming. 

[41] Li, P., Lu, Y., & Wang, J. (2016). Does flattening government improve economic 
performance? Evidence from China. Journal of Development Economics, 123, 18-
37. 

[42] Li, X., Liu, C., Weng, X., & Zhou, L. A. (2019). Target setting in tournaments: 
Theory and evidence from China. The Economic Journal, 129(623), 2888-2915. 

[43] Linder, F., Desmarais, B., Burgess, M., & Giraudy, E. (2020). Text as policy: 
Measuring policy similarity through bill text reuse. Policy Studies Journal, 48(2), 
546-574. 

[44] Liu, F. C., Simon, D. F., Sun, Y. T., & Cao, C. (2011). China’s innovation policies: 
Evolution, institutional structure, and trajectory. Research Policy, 40(7), 917-931. 

[45] Liu, J., Li, S., Ouyang, Z., Tam, C., & Chen, X. (2008). Ecological and 
socioeconomic effects of China’s policies for ecosystem services. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 105(28), 9477-9482. 

[46] Liu, X., Mattoo, A., Wang, Z., & Wei, S. J. (2020). Services development and 
comparative advantage in manufacturing. Journal of Development Economics, 144, 
102438. 

[47] Lowe, W. (2008). Understanding wordscores. Political Analysis, 16(4), 356-371. 
[48] Markevich, A., & Zhuravskaya, E. (2011). M-form hierarchy with poorly-

diversified divisions: A case of Khrushchev’s reform in Soviet Russia. Journal of 
Public Economics, 95(11-12), 1550-1560. 

[49] Mishkin, F. S. (2009). Globalization and financial development. Journal of 
Development Economics, 89(2), 164-169. 

[50] Mookherjee, D. (2006). Decentralization, hierarchies, and incentives: A 
mechanism design perspective. Journal of Economic Literature, 44(2), 367-390. 

 27 



[51] Mookherjee, D. (2015). Political decentralization. Annual Review of Economics, 
7(1), 231-249. 

[52] Muralidharan, K., Niehaus, P., Sukhtankar, S., & Weaver, J. (2021). Improving 
last-mile service delivery using phone-based monitoring. American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics, 13(2), 52-82. 

[53] Narciso, G., & Severgnini, B. (2023). The deep roots of rebellion. Journal of 
Development Economics, 160, 102952. 

[54] Porta, R. L., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1998). Law and 
finance. Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1113-1155. 

[55] Qian, Y., & Xu, C. (1993). The M-form hierarchy and China’s economic reform. 
European Economic Review, 37(2-3), 541-548. 

[56] Rogger, D., & Somani, R. (2023). Hierarchy and information. Journal of Public 
Economics, 219, 104823. 

[57] Slapin, J. B., & Proksch, S. O. (2008). A scaling model for estimating time-series 
party positions from texts. American Journal of Political Science, 52(3), 705-722. 

[58] Su, F., Tao, R., Xi, L., & Li, M. (2012). Local officials’ incentives and China’s 
economic growth: Tournament thesis reexamined and alternative explanatory 
framework. China & World Economy, 20(4), 1-18. 

[59] Tavits, M. (2007). Principle vs. pragmatism: Policy shifts and political competition. 
American Journal of Political Science, 51(1), 151-165. 

[60] Tukiainen, J., Blesse, S., Bohne, A., Giuffrida, L. M., Jääskeläinen, J., Luukinen, 
A., & Sieppi, A. (2024). What are the priorities of bureaucrats? Evidence from 
conjoint experiments with procurement officials. Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization, 227, 106716. 

[61] Wong, H. L., Wang, Y., Luo, R., Zhang, L., & Rozelle, S. (2017). Local governance 
and the quality of local infrastructure: Evidence from village road projects in rural 
China. Journal of Public Economics, 152, 119-132. 

[62] Xu, C. (2011). The fundamental institutions of China’s reforms and development. 
Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4), 1076-1151. 

[63] Zhang, C., Zhu, Y., & Lu, Z. (2015). Trade openness, financial openness, and 
 28 



financial development in China. Journal of International Money and Finance, 59, 
287-309. 

[64] Zhang, J., Wang, L., & Wang, S. (2012). Financial development and economic 
growth: Recent evidence from China. Journal of Comparative Economics, 40(3), 
393-412. 

[65] Zhou, L. A. (2016). The administrative subcontract: Significance, relevance and 
implications for intergovernmental relations in China. Chinese Journal of 
Sociology, 2(1), 34-74. 

  

 29 



Figure 1: Illustration of Government Website Text Accessibility 
Notes: This Figure depicts the administrative divisions of Chinese districts and counties. We collect text data from 
the government websites of 1,269 Chinese districts and counties. After matching this data with other district and 
county data, the effective sample size is reduced to 969, which are marked in red on the map.  

 
 
  

 30 



Figure 2: The Dynamics of County-Level Government Website Texts 
Notes: The Figure provides an annual summary of the average number of news articles on sample district and county 
government websites, as well as the average proportion of articles related to the implementation of central financial 
policies. The former is presented with blue bar charts, while the latter is shown with a line graph. 

 
  

 31 



Figure 3: Flowchart for CFPI Index Construction 
Notes: This Figure illustrates the process used to construct the CFPI index, which is divided into 
three core modules: building the database of district and county government website texts, 
developing the CFPI index vocabulary, and constructing the CFPI index.  

 
 
 
 
  

 32 



Table 1: CFPI Vocabulary Set 
Category Content 

Central (C) Central Government; National; State Council; Ministry of Finance; China 
Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC); China Banking Regulatory 
Commission (CBRC); China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) 

Financial Policy Insurance; Capital; Banking; Financial; Fiscal; Investment; Budget; Credit; 
(FP) Financing; Payment; Assets; Mutual Fund; Audit; Loan; Revenue; 

Expenditure; Guarantee; Issuance; Securities 
Implementation (I) Work; Operate; Regulate; Develop; Strengthen; Serve; Undertake; Require; 

Reform; Manage; Support; Assume; Construct; Refine; Notify; Initiate; 
Comply (with the law); Establish; Implement; Provide; Utilize; Execute; 
Draft; Advance; Approve; Elevate; Oversee; Standardize; Fulfill; Assess; 
Adjust; Apply. 

Notes: This Table presents the subset used in constructing the CFPI index.  

 
  

 33 



Table 2: Variable Definition 
Variable Definition 

Financial Development Ratio of financial institutions’ total loan balances to GDP 
CFPI Ratio of target texts to total government website texts 

Primary GDP Share Ratio of primary industry’s added value to GDP 
GDP Growth GDP growth rate 

Population Growth Growth rate of registered population 
Ratio of general public budget expenditures to general public budget 

Expenditure Ratio 
revenues 

Per Capita Expenditure Per capita general public budget expenditure 
lnExpenditure Natural logarithm of general public budget expenditure 

Ratio of primary and secondary school students to registered 
Students Ratio 

population 
People Density Ratio of registered population to land area 

Notes: This Table reports the variables primarily used in our paper, along with their corresponding definitions or 
construction methods. 

 
  

 34 



Table 3: Descriptive Statistics 
Panel A: Descriptive statistics of key variables 

Variable Obs. Mean S.D. P10 Median P90 
Financial Development 7,120 0.8512 0.4891 0.3441 0.7336 1.5048 

CFPI 7,120 0.0991 0.0649 0.0317 0.0878 0.1743 
Primary GDP Share 7,107 0.1843 0.1222 0.0428 0.1673 0.3434 

GDP Growth 7,100 0.0890 0.0961 0.0029 0.0855 0.1906 
Population Growth 6,979 0.0014 0.0180 -0.0102 0.0003 0.0139 
Expenditure Ratio 7,062 5.3420 5.6495 1.3546 3.6767 10.4937 

Per Capita Expenditure 6,973 0.3347 0.3906 0.0665 0.1943 0.7908 
lnExpenditure 7,088 3.4666 0.6496 2.6312 3.4799 4.2848 
Students Ratio 6,938 0.1144 0.0360 0.0694 0.1136 0.1581 
People Density 6,942 0.0381 0.0369 0.0031 0.0264 0.0863 

Panel B: Descriptive statistics of CFPI grouped by regional characteristics 
Variable Group Obs. Mean S.D. Median 

High 3,649 0.0924 0.0613 0.0833 
People Density 

Low 3,471 0.1063 0.0681 0.0946 
High 3,570 0.0998 0.0665 0.0877 

GDP Growth 
Low 3,550 0.0986 0.0635 0.0882 

[2009, 2013] 1,145 0.0913 0.0691 0.0826 
Year [2014, 2018] 2,544 0.0964 0.0638 0.0858 

[2019, 2023]  3,431 0.1039 0.0642 0.0921 
Notes: This Table provides descriptive statistics for the main variables, including the number of observations, 
mean, variance, 10th percentile, median, and 90th percentile. All continuous variables have been subjected to 
winsorization at the 1% level at both the upper and lower tails. 

 
 
 
  

 35 



Table 4: Main Results 
Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) 

CFPI 0.5503*** 0.2001*** 0.1703** 0.1641** 
 (0.174) (0.074) (0.071) (0.071) 

Primary GDP Share   0.7047*** 0.8128*** 
   (0.172) (0.169) 

GDP Growth   -0.4114*** -0.4046*** 
   (0.038) (0.039) 

Population Growth   -0.0864 -0.2564 
   (0.151) (0.156) 

Expenditure Ratio    -0.0015 
    (0.003) 

Per Capita Expenditure    -0.0577 
    (0.046) 

lnExpenditure    0.1176*** 
    (0.040) 

Students Ratio    -0.4431 
    (0.345) 

People Density    4.3547** 
    (1.704) 

Constant 0.7966*** 0.8302*** 0.7416*** 0.2217 
 (0.023) (0.007) (0.033) (0.149) 

County FEs NO YES YES YES 
Year FEs NO YES YES YES 

Obs. 7,120 7,073 6,913 6,778 
Adjusted R2 0.0052 0.8517 0.8620 0.8641 

Notes: This Table reports the main regression results. The dependent variable is the level of financial 
development. The core explanatory variable is the CFPI. Column (1) includes only the CFPI variable. Column 
(2) introduces county fixed effects and year fixed effects. Column (3) includes basic control variables, and column 
(4) further introduces additional control variables related to fiscal revenues and expenditures. Standard errors in 
all columns are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 5%, and 1% 
respectively, with standard error in parentheses. 

 
  

 36 



Table 5: 2SLS Results 
First Stage Second Stage First Stage Second Stage 

Variable 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

Post × Finance Degree -0.0456**  -0.0445**  
 (0.019)  (0.020)  

Finance Degree 0.0432**  0.0447**  
 (0.018)  (0.018)  

CFPI  6.0558**  3.4892** 
  (2.447)  (1.380) 

Primary GDP Share   0.0066 0.7737*** 
   (0.027) (0.146) 

GDP Growth   -0.0136* -0.3536*** 
   (0.008) (0.048) 

Population Growth   -0.0351 0.0012 
   (0.039) (0.228) 

Expenditure Ratio   0.0011** -0.0054* 
   (0.001) (0.003) 

Per Capita Expenditure   -0.0164** 0.0491 
   (0.008) (0.046) 

lnExpenditure   -0.0036 0.0806** 
   (0.007) (0.033) 

Students Ratio   0.1478** -0.9535** 
   (0.068) (0.385) 

People Density   0.3918 3.2837** 
   (0.300) (1.497) 

County FEs YES YES YES YES 
Year FEs YES YES YES YES 

Obs. 5,473 5,473 5,244 5,244 
F Statistic 3.08 3.23 

Notes: This table reports the 2SLS regression results using instrumental variables. The dependent variable is the 
level of financial development. The variable Post is set to 1 for years after 2012 and 0 otherwise. The variable 
Finance Degree is set to 1 if the county-level executive has a finance degree, and 0 otherwise. Columns (1) and 
(2) present the regression results without control variables, while columns (3) and (4) include control variables. 
Standard errors in all columns are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 
5%, and 1% respectively, with standard error in parentheses. 

 
  

 37 



Table 6: Robustness Tests 
Incorporating Financial 

Variable Developmentt+1  Excluding 
Municipalities Sample 

(1) (2)  (3) (4) 
CFPI 0.1887** 0.1717**  0.2016*** 0.1654** 

 (0.077) (0.078)  (0.074) (0.071) 
Primary GDP Share  0.4736***   0.8171*** 

  (0.177)   (0.169) 
GDP Growth  -0.3301***   -0.4001*** 

  (0.037)   (0.039) 
Population Growth  -0.0835   -0.2572* 

  (0.142)   (0.156) 
Expenditure Ratio  -0.0024   -0.0015 

  (0.003)   (0.003) 
Per Capita Expenditure  -0.0183   -0.0603 

  (0.047)   (0.046) 
lnExpenditure  0.1181***   0.1183*** 

  (0.044)   (0.040) 
Students Ratio  -0.3412   -0.4390 

  (0.333)   (0.345) 
People Density  2.9470*   4.3537** 

  (1.726)   (1.705) 
Constant 0.8478*** 0.3330**  0.8291*** 0.2171 

 (0.008) (0.160)  (0.007) (0.149) 
County FEs YES YES  YES YES 

Year FEs YES YES  YES YES 
Obs. 5,991 5,834  7,055 6,760 

Adjusted R2 0.8630 0.8684  0.8512 0.8636 
Notes: This Table presents the results of the robustness tests. Columns (1) and (2) use Financial Developmentt+1 
as the dependent variable to address concerns of reverse causality. Columns (3) and (4) exclude samples from 
municipalities directly under the central government in the regression sample. Columns (1) and (3) include only 
the CFPI and fixed effects, while columns (2) and (4) further incorporate control variables. Standard errors in all 
columns are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively, 
with standard error in parentheses. 

 
  

 38 



Table 7: The Effects of Official’s Background 
Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

Finance Degree -0.2670* -0.2346**     
 (0.138) (0.118)     

Finance Degree × CFPI 1.9695** 1.8724**     
 (0.882) (0.741)     

Young   -0.0178 -0.0202*   
   (0.013) (0.012)   

Young × CFPI   0.2138* 0.2359**   
   (0.110) (0.106)   

Master     0.0045 0.0033 
     (0.017) (0.017) 

Master × CFPI     0.1363 0.1911 
     (0.126) (0.124) 

CFPI 0.1867** 0.1537** 0.1496 0.1016 0.0899 0.0115 
 (0.077) (0.074) (0.093) (0.088) (0.119) (0.117) 

Controls NO YES NO YES NO YES 
Constant YES YES YES YES YES YES 

County FEs YES YES YES YES YES YES 
Year FEs YES YES YES YES YES YES 

Obs. 6,402 6,141 6,421 6,151 6,996 6,709 
Adjusted R2 0.8492 0.8593 0.8556 0.8668 0.8550 0.8656 

Notes: This Table reports the heterogeneous effects of CFPI due to differences in the academic background and 
highest degree of county party secretaries and administrative heads. In columns (1) and (2), the variable Finance 
Degree is assigned a value of 1 when the party secretaries or administrative heads have a finance-related 
background. In columns (3) and (4), the variable Young is set to 1 if both the county-level Party Secretary and the 
executive are under 50 years old, and 0 otherwise. In columns (5) and (6), the variable Master is set to 1 if either 
the party secretary or the administrative head has a master’s degree or higher, and 0 otherwise. All columns include 
control variables and fixed effects. Standard errors in all columns are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** 
denote significance levels at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively, with standard error in parentheses. 

 
  

 39 



Table 8: The Heterogeneity across County Endowment 
Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) 

Group(Financial Development) 0.2551***    
 (0.020)    

Group(Financial Development) × CFPI 0.2226**    
 (0.109)    

Group(Per Capita Expenditure)  -0.0355*   
  (0.021)   

Group(Per Capita Expenditure) × CFPI  0.2399*   
  (0.124)   

Group(Industrial Output)   -0.0130  
   (0.023)  

Group(Industrial Output) × CFPI   0.2588*  
   (0.150)  

Group(Secondary Worker Share)    -0.0277 
    (0.019) 

Group(Secondary Worker Share) × CFPI    0.2295** 
    (0.114) 

CFPI 0.0096 0.0496 -0.0228 -0.1087 
 (0.062) (0.080) (0.101) (0.084) 

Controls YES YES YES YES 
Constant YES YES YES YES 

County FEs YES YES YES YES 
Year FEs YES YES YES YES 

Obs. 6,778 6,778 4,072 3,683 
Adjusted R2 0.8890 0.8642 0.8845 0.9000 

Notes: This Table reports the heterogeneous effects of the CFPI attributable to differences in 
district and county endowments. We classify different sample groups annually based on the 
median values of Financial Development, Per Capita Expenditure, Industrial Output, and 
Secondary Worker Share. Group(Variable) is a dummy variable, assigned a value of 1 when 
greater than the median. All columns include control variables and fixed effects. Standard errors 
in all columns are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 
5%, and 1% respectively, with standard error in parentheses. 

 
  

 40 



Table 9: The Impact of County Culture 
Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) 

Group(Confucian) -0.0129 -0.0185   
 (0.025) (0.026)   

Group(Confucian) × CFPI -0.2498** -0.2592**   
 (0.119) (0.119)   

Group(Shuyuan)   0.0503** 0.0369* 
   (0.024) (0.022) 

Group(Shuyuan) × CFPI   -0.2962** -0.2540* 
   (0.141) (0.136) 

CFPI 0.2969*** 0.2669*** 0.3243*** 0.2731*** 
 (0.094) (0.092) (0.092) (0.092) 

Controls NO YES NO YES 
Constant YES YES YES YES 

County FEs YES YES YES YES 
Year FEs YES YES YES YES 

Obs. 6,730 6,472 7,073 6,778 
Adjusted R2 0.8504 0.8623 0.8519 0.8642 

Notes: This Table reports the heterogeneous effects of the CFPI attributable to differences in district and county 
culture. We classify different sample groups annually based on the median values of province-level Confucian 
temple (Confucian) and Shuyuan. Group(Variable) is a dummy variable, assigned a value of 1 when greater than 
the median. All columns include control variables and fixed effects. Standard errors in all columns are clustered 
at the county level. *, **, and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively, with standard error 
in parentheses. 

 
  

 41 



Table 10: The Impact of Central Government Commendations 
Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) 
Practice 0.0159* 0.0477*** -0.0208 -0.0148 

 (0.009) (0.008) (0.018) (0.016) 
Practice × CFPI   0.2969* 0.3279** 

   (0.162) (0.156) 
CFPI   0.1445** 0.1216* 

   (0.073) (0.072) 
Controls YES YES NO YES 

County FEs YES YES YES YES 
Year FEs YES YES YES YES 

Obs. 5,771 39,660 5,920 5,771 
Adjusted R2 0.8692 0.7074 0.8633 0.8695 

Notes: This Table reports the effects of financial policy implementation commended by the central government. 
Since 2016, the central government has annually recognized provinces that have shown tangible progress in the 
financial sector. Based on this, we construct the dummy variable Practice, which is assigned a value of 1 for 
districts and counties in provinces recognized in that year. Columns (1) and (2) include the variable Practice, 
with the former using the same sample as the main regression and the latter using a sample from all national 
districts and counties. Columns (3) and (4) include an interaction term between Practice and CFPI, with column 
(3) excluding control variables and column (4) further including them. All columns include fixed effects. 
Standard errors in all columns are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 
5%, and 1% respectively, with standard error in parentheses. 

  

 42 



Appendix  
Figure A1: The Government Information Disclosure module 

 
Notes: This figure is sourced from the Government Information Disclosure module on the State 
Council website, where all policies of the Chinese State Council are publicly available and 
categorized by theme. For our analysis, we selected policies from the “Finance, Financial, and Audit” 
submodule. 
  

 43 



Figure A2: Example of Obtaining County-Level Government Releases Process 

 

 
Notes: These two subfigures illustrate how we locate the government releases for counties, using 
the example of Hailing District in Taizhou, Jiangsu Province, China. As described in Section 2.3, 
we first navigate to the government website of Taizhou, shown in the first figure. At the bottom, 
links to the government websites of its subordinate counties can be found. By following the link to 
the Hailing District government website, shown in the second figure, we can see that the site has a 
total of eight modules. The government releases a module on the Hailing District website called the 
“News Center.” This exemplifies the challenge in our data processing, as each county website 
requires individual identification of the government releases module and the development of 
specific programs to extract the data.  
 

 44