Minimum Wages and Employment: 

A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry 


in New Jersey and Pennsylvania 


On April 1, 1992, New Jersey's minimum wage rose from $4.25 to $5.05 per 
hour. To evaluate the impact of the law we surveyed 410 fast-food restaurants in 
New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania before and after the rise. Comparisons of 
employment growth at stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania (where the 
minimum wage was constant) provide simple estimates of the effect of the higher 
minimum wage. We also compare employment changes at stores in New Jersey 
that were initially paying high wages (above $5) to the changes at lower-wage 
stores. We find no indication that the rise in the minimum wage reduced 
employment. (JEL 530, 523) 

How do employers in a low-wage labor cent studies that rely on a similar compara- 
market respond to an increase in the mini- tive methodology have failed to detect a 
mum wage? The prediction from conven- negative employment effect of higher mini- 
tional economic theory is unambiguous: a mum wages. Analyses of the 1990-1991 in- 
rise in the minimum wage leads perfectly creases in the federal minimum wage 
competitive employers to cut employment (Lawrence F. Katz and Krueger, 1992; Card, 
(George J. Stigler, 1946). Although studies 1992a) and of an earlier increase in the 
in the 1970's based on aggregate teenage minimum wage in California (Card, 1992b) 
employment rates usually confirmed this find no adverse employment impact. A study 
prediction,' earlier studies based on com- of minimum-wage floors in Britain (Stephen 
parisons of employment at affected and un- Machin and Alan Manning, 1994) reaches a 
affected establishments often did not (e.g., similar conclusion. 
Richard A. Lester, 1960, 1964). Several re- This paper presents new evidence on the 

effect of minimum wages on establishment- 
level employment outcomes. We analyze the 
experiences of 410 fast-food restaurants in 

*Department of Economics, Princeton University, New Jersey and Pennsylvania following the 
Princeton, NJ 08544. We are grateful to the Institute increase in New Jersey's minimum wage 
for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin, for from $4.25 to $5.05 per hour. Comparisons 
partial financial support. Thanks to Orley Ashenfelter, 
Charles Brown, Richard Lester, Gary Solon, two of employment, wages, and prices at stores 
anonymous referees, and seminar participants at in New Jersey and Pennsylvania before and 
Princeton, Michigan State, Texas A&M, University of after the rise offer a simple method for 
Michigan, university of Pennsylvania, ~niversitJ  of evaluating the effects of the-minimum wage. 
Chicago, and the NBER for comments and sugges- ~~~~~~i~~~~ within N~~ jerseybetween
tions. We also acknowledge the expert research assis- 
tance of Susan Belden, Chris Burris, Geraldine Harris, high-wage paying 
and Jonathan Orszag. than the new minimum rate prior to its 

'see Charles Brown et al. (1982,1983) for surveys of effective date) and other stores provide an 
this literature. A recent update (Allison J. Wellington, alternative estimate of the impact of the 
1991) concludes that the employment effects of the 
minimum wage are negative but small: a 10-percent new lawe
increase in the minimum is estimated to lower teenage In addition to the simplicity of our empir- 
employment rates by 0.06 percentage points. ical methodology, several other features of 

772 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 773 

the New Jersey law and our data set are and 1991 to measures of the relative mini- 
also significant. First, the rise in the mini- mum wage in each state. 
mum wage occurred during a recession. The 
increase had been legislated two years ear- I. The New Jersey Law 
lier when the state economy was relatively 
healthy. By the time of the actual increase, A bill signed into law in November 1989 
the unemployment rate in New Jersey had raised the federal minimum wage from $3.35 
risen substantially and last-minute political per hour to $3.80 effective April 1, 1990, 
action almost succeeded in reducing the with a further increase to $4.25 per hour on 
minimum-wage increase. It is unlikely that April 1, 1991. In early 1990 the New Jersey 
the effects of the higher minimum wage legislature went one step further, enacting 
were obscured by a rising tide of general parallel increases in the state minimum wage 
economic conditions. for 1990 and 1991 and an increase to $5.05 

Second, New Jersey is a relatively small per hour effective April 1, 1992. The sched- 
state with an economy that is closely linked uled 1992 increase gave New Jersey the 
to nearby states. We believe that a control highest state minimum wage in the country 
group of fast-food stores in eastern Pennsyl- and was strongly opposed by business lead- 
vania forms a natural basis for comparison ers in the state (see Bureau of National 
with the experiences of restaurants in New Affairs, Daily Labor Report, 5 May 1990). 
Jersey. Wage variation across stores in New In the two years between passage of the 
Jersey, however, allows us to compare the $5.05 minimum wage and its effective date, 
experiences of high-wage and low-wage New Jersey's economy slipped into reces- 
stores within New Jersey and to test the sion. Concerned with the potentially ad-
validity of the Pennsylvania control group. verse impact of a higher minimum wage, the 
Moreover, since seasonal patterns of em- state legislature voted in March 1992 to 
ployment are similar in New Jersey and phase in the 80-cent increase over two years. 
eastern Pennsylvania, as well as across The vote fell just short of the margin re- 
high- and low-wage stores within New Jer- quired to override a gubernatorial veto, and 
sey, our comparative methodology effec- the Governor allowed the $5.05 rate to go 
tively "differences out" any. seasonal em- into effect on April 1 before vetoing the 
ployment effects. two-step legislation. Faced with the prospect 

Third, we successfully followed nearly 100 of having to roll back wages for minimum- 
percent of stores from a first wave of inter- wage earners, the legislature dropped the 
views conducted just before the rise in the issue. Despite a strong last-minute chal-
minimum wage (in February and March lenge, the $5.05 minimum rate took effect 
1992) to a second wave conducted 7-8 as originally planned. 
months after (in November and December 
1992). We have complete information on 11. Sample Design and Evaluation 
store closings and take account of employ- 
ment changes at the closed stores in our Early in 1992 we decided to evaluate the 
analyses. We therefore measure the overall impending increase in the New Jersey mini- 
effect of the minimum wage on average mum wage by surveying fast-food restau- 
employment, and not simply its effect on rants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylva- 
surviving establishments. niae2 Our choice of the fast-food industry 

-Our analysis of employment trends at was driven by several factors. First, fast-food 
stores that were open for business before stores are a leading employer of low-wage 
the increase in the minimum wage ignores workers: in 1987, franchised restaurants em- 
any potential effect of minimum wages on 
the rate of new store openings. To assess 
the likely magnitude of this effect we relate 
state-specific growth rates in the number of 2At the time we were uncertain whether the $5.05 
McDonald's fast-food outlets between 1986 rate would go into effect or be overridden. 



THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

Stores in: 
A1 l NJ PA 

Waue I ,  February 15-March 4, 1992: 

Number of stores in sample frame:a 
 473 364 109 
Number of refusals: 
 63 33 30 
Number interviewed: 
 410 33 1 79 
Response rate (percentage): 
 86.7 90.9 72.5 

Wace 2, Nocember 5 -  December 31, 1992: 

Number of stores in sample frame: 
 410 331 79 
Number closed: 
 6 5 1 
Number under rennovation: 
 2 2 0 
Number temporarily closed:' 
 2 2 0 
Number of refusals: 
 1 1 0 
Number in tervie~ed:~ 
 399 321 78 

aStores with working phone numbers only; 29 stores in original sample frame had 
disconnected phone numbers. 

'~ncludes one store closed because of highway construction and one store closed 
because of a fire. 

'Includes 371 phone interviews and 28 personal interviews of stores that refused an 
initial request for a phone interview. 

ployed 25 percent of all workers in the rants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylva- 
restaurant industry (see U.S. Department of nia from the Burger King, KFC, Wendy's, 
Commerce, 1990 table 13). Second, fast-food and Roy Rogers chain^.^ The first wave of 
restaurants comply with minimum-wage reg- the survey was conducted by telephone in 
ulations and would be expected to raise late February and early March 1992, a little 
wages in response to a rise in the minimum over a month before the scheduled increase 
wage. Third, the job requirements and in New Jersey's minimum wage. The survey 
products of fast-food restaurants are rela- included questions on employment, starting 
tively homogeneous, making it easier to ob- wages, prices, and other store characteris- 
tain reliable measures of employment, t i c ~ . ~  
wages, and product prices. The absence of Table 1shows that 473 stores in our sam- 
tips greatly simplifies the measurement of ple frame had working telephone numbers 
wages in the industry. Fourth, it is relatively when we tried to reach them in February- 
easy to construct a sample frame of fran- March 1992. Restaurants were called as 
chised restaurants. Finally, past experience many as nine times to elicit a response. We 
(Katz and Krueger, 1992) suggested that obtained completed interviews (with some 
fast-food restaurants have high response item nonresponse) from 410 of the restau- 
rates to telephone survey^.^ rants, for an overall response rate of 87 

Based on these considerations we con- percent. The response rate was higher in 
structed a sample frame of fast-food restau- New Jersey (91 percent) than in Pennsylva- 

4 ~ h seample was derived from white-pages tele-
3 ~ an pilot survey Katz and Krueger (1992) obtained phone listings for New Jersey and Pennsylvania as of 

very low response rates from McDonald's restaurants. February 1992. 
For this reason, McDonald's restaurants were excluded 'copies of the questionnaires used in both waves of 
from Katz and Krueger's and our sample frames. the survey are available from the authors upon request. 



VOL.84 NO. 4 C A mA ND KRUEGER: MINIiiMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 775 

nia (72.5 percent) because our interviewer nently closed stores but is treated as missing 
made fewer call-backs to nonrespondents in for the temporarily closed stores. (Full-
Penn~ylvania.I~n the analysis below we in- time-equivalent [FTE] employment was cal- 
vestigate possible biases associated with the culated as the number of full-time workers 
degree of difficulty in obtaining the first- [including managers] plus 0.5 times the 
wave interview. number of part-time workers.)' Means are 

The second wave of the survey was con- presented separately for stores in New Jer- 
ducted in November and December 1992, sey and Pennsylvania, along with t statistics 
about eight months after the minimum-wage for the null hypothesis that the means are 
increase. Only the 410 stores that re- equal in the two states. 
sponded in the first wave were contacted in Rows la-e show the distribution of stores 
the second round of interviews. We success- by chain and ownership status (company- 
fully interviewed 371 (90 percent) of these owned versus franchisee-owned). The 
stores by phone in November 1992. Because Burger King, Roy Rogers, and Wendy's 
of a concern that nonresponding restaurants stores in our sample have similar average 
might have closed, we hired an interviewer food prices, store hours, and employment 
to drive to each of the 39 nonrespondents levels. The KFC stores are smaller and are 
and determine whether the store was still open for fewer hours. They also offer a 
open, and to conduct a personal interview if more expensive main course than stores in 
possible. The interviewer discovered that six the other chains (chicken vs, hamburgers). 
restaurants were permanently closed, two In wave 1, average employment was 23.3 
were temporarily closed (one because of a full-time equivalent workers per store in 
fire, one because of road construction), and Pennsylvania, compared with an average of 
two were under renovation.' Of the 29 stores 20.4 in New Jersey. Starting wages were 
open for business, all but one granted a very similar among stores in the two states, 
request for a personal interview. As a re- although the average price of a "full meal" 
sult, we have second-wave interview data (medium soda, small fries, and an entree) 
for 99.8 percent of the restaurants that re- was significantly higher in New Jersey. There 
sponded in the first wave of the survey, and were no significant cross-state differences in 
information on closure status for 100 per- average hours of operation, the fraction of 
cent of the sample. full-time workers, or the prevalence of bonus 

Table 2 presents the means for several programs to recruit new worker^.^ 
key variables in our data set, averaged over The average starting wage at fast-food 
the subset of nonmissing responses for each restaurants in New Jersey increased by 10 
variable. In constructing the means, employ- percent following the rise in the minimum 
ment in wave 2 is set to 0 for the perma- wage. Further insight into this change is 

provided in Figure 1, which shows the dis- 
tributions of starting wages in the two states 
before and after the rise. In wave 1, the 
distributions in New Jersey and Pennsylva- 

6~esponserates per call-back were almost identical nia were very similar. By wave 2 virtually all 
in the two states. Among New Jersey stores, 44.5 
percent responded on the first call, and 72.0 percent 
responded after at most two call-backs. Among Penn- 
sylvania stores 42.2 percent responded on the first call, 'we discuss the sensitivity of our results to alterna- 
and 71.6 percent responded after at most two call- tive assumptions on the measurement of employment 
backs. in Section 111-C. 

7 ~osf April 1993 the store closed because of road ' ~ h e s e  programs offer current employees a cash 
construction and one of the stores closed for renova- "bounty" for recruiting any new employee who stays 
tion had reopened. The store closed by fire was open on the job for a minimum period of time. Typical 
when our telephone interviewer called in November bounties are $50-$75. Recruiting programs that award 
1992 but refused the interview. By the time of the the recruiter with an "employee of the month" desig- 
follow-up personal interview a mall fire had closed the nation or other noncash bonuses are excluded from our 
store. tabulations. 



THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

Stores in: 

Variable NJ PA t a  


1. Distribution of Store Types (percentages): 

a. Burger King 
b. KFC 
c. Roy Rogers 
d. Wendy's 
e. Company-owned 

2. Means in Wave I: 

a. FTE employment 20.4 
(0.51) 

b. Percentage full-time employees 32.8 
(1.3) 

c. Starting wage 4.61 
(0.02) 

d. Wage = $4.25 (percentage) 30.5 
(2.5) 

e. Price of full meal 

f. Hours open (weekday) 

g. Recruiting bonus 

3. Means in Ware 2: 

a. FTE employment 21.0 21.2 -0.2 
(0.52) (0.94) 

b. Percentage full-time employees 35.9 30.4 1.8 
(1.4) (2.8) 

c. Starting wage 5.08 4.62 10.8 
(0.01) (0.04) 

d. Wage = $4.25 (percentage) 0.0 25.3 -
(4.9) 

e. Wage = $5.05 (percentage) 85.2 1.3 36.1 
(2.0) (1.3) 

f. Price of full meal 3.41 3.03 5.0 
(0.04) (0.07) 

g. Hours open (weekday) 14.4 14.7 -0.8 
(0.2) (0.3) 

h. Recruiting bonus 20.3 23.4 -0.6 
(2.3) (4.9) 

Notes: See text for definitions. Standard errors are given in parentheses. 
aTest of equality of means in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. 

restaurants in New Jersey that had been Despite the increase in wages, full-time- 
paying less than $5.05 per hour reported a equivalent employment increased in New 
starting wage equal to the new rate. Inter- Jersey relative to Pennsylvania. Whereas 
estingly, the minimum-wage increase had no New Jersey stores were initially smaller, 
apparent "spillover" on higher-wage restau- employment gains in New Jersey coupled 
rants in the state: the mean percentage wage with losses in Pennsylvania led to a small 
change for these stores was -3.1 percent. and statistically insignificant interstate 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 

February 1992  

Wage Range 

November 1 9 9 2 

Wage Range 

New Jersey Pennsylvania 

FIGURE1. DISTRIBUTIOOFN S TARTINWGA GER ATES 



778 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER I994 

difference in wave 2. Only two other vari- our survey. We present data by state in 
ables show a relative change between waves columns (i) and (ii), and for stores in New 
1 and 2: the fraction of full-time employees Jersey classified by whether the starting 
and the price of a meal. Both variables wage in wave 1 was exactly $4.25 per hour 
increased in New Jersey relative to Pennsyl- [column (iv)] between $4.26 and $4.99 per 
vania. hour [column (v)] or $5.00 or more per hour 

We can assess the reliability of our survey [column (vi)]. We also show the differences 
questionnaire by comparing the responses in average employment between New Jersey 
of 11 stores that were inadvertently inter- and Pennsylvania stores [column (iii)] and 
viewed twice in the first wave of the survey.10 between stores in the various wage ranges 
Assuming that measurement errors in the in New Jersey [columns (viil-(viii)]. 
two interviews are independent of each Row 3 of the table presents the changes 
other and independent of the true variable, in average employment between waves 1 
the correlation between responses gives an and 2. These entries are simply the differ- 
estimate of the "reliability ratio" (the ratio ences between the averages for the two 
of the variance of the signal to the com- waves (i.e., row 2 minus row 1). An alterna- 
bined variance of the signal and noise). The tive estimate of the change is presented in 
estimated reliability ratios are fairly high, row 4: here we have computed the change 
ranging from 0.70 for full-time equivalent in employment over the subsample of stores 
employment to 0.98 for the price of a meal." that reported valid employment data in both 

We have also checked whether stores with waves. We refer to this group of stores as 
missing data for any key variables are dif- the balanced subsample. Finally, row 5 pre- 
ferent from restaurants with complete re- sents the average change in employment in 
sponses. We find that stores with missing the balanced subsample, treating wave-2 
data on employment, wages, or prices are employment at the four temporarily closed 
similar in other respects to stores with com- stores as zero, rather than as missing. 
plete data. There is a significant size differ- As noted in Table 2, New Jersey stores 
ential associated with the likelihood of the were initially smaller than their Pennsylva- 
store closing after wave 1. The six stores nia counterparts but grew relative to Penn- 
that closed were smaller than other stores sylvania stores after the rise in the mini- 
(with an average employment of only 12.4 mum wage. The relative gain (the "dif-
full-time-equivalent employees in wave 1).12 ference in differences" of the changes in 

employment) is 2.76 FTE employees (or 13 
111. Employment Effects of the percent), with a t statistic of 2.03. Inspec- 

Minimum-Wage Increase tion of the averages in rows 4 and 5 shows 
that the relative change between New Jer- 

A. Differences in Differences sey and Pennsylvania stores is virtually iden- 
tical when the analysis is restricted to the 

Table 3 summarizes the levels and balanced subsample, and it is only slightly 
changes in average employment per store in smaller when wave-2 employment at the 

temporarily closed stores is treated as zero. 
Within New Jersey, employment ex-

10These restaurants were interviewed twice because panded at the low-wage stores (those paying 
their phone numbers appeared in more than one phone $4.25 per hour in wave 1) and contracted at 
book, and neither the interviewer nor the respondent 
noticed that they were previously interviewed. the high-wage stores (those paying $5.00 or 

11Similar reliability ratios for very similar questions more per hour). Indeed, the average change 
were obtained by Katz and Krueger (1992). in employment at the high-wage stores 

''A probit analysis of the probability of closure ( - 2.16 FTE employees) is almost identical 
shows that the initial size of the store is a significant 
predictor of closure. The level of starting wages has a to the change among Pennsylvania stores 
numerically small and statistically insignificant coeffi- ( -2.28 FTE employees). Since high-wage 
cient in the probit model. stores in New Jersey should have been 



VOL.  84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 

largely unaffected by the new minimum els of the form: 
wage, this comparison provides a specifica- 
tion test of the validity of the Pennsylvania ( l a )  A E , = a + b X i + c N J i + ~ ,  
control group. The test is clearly passed. 
Regardless of whether the affected stores 
are compared to stores in Pennsylvania or 

( l b )  AE, = a' +blXi + clGAPi+ E{ 
high-wage stores in New Jersey, the esti- 
mated employment effect of the minimum where AE, is the change in employment 
wage is similar. from wave 1to wave 2 at store i, Xi is a set 

The results in Table 3 suggest that em- of characteristics of store i, and NJ, is a 
ployment contracted between February and dummy variable that equals 1 for stores in 
November of 1992 at fast-food stores that New Jersey. GAP, is an alternative measure 
were unaffected by the rise in the minimum of the impact of the minimum wage at store 
wage (stores in Pennsylvania and stores in i based on the initial wage at that store 
New Jersey paying $5.00 per hour or more (W,,): 
in wave 1). We suspect that the reason for 
this contraction was the continued worsen- GAP, = 0 for stores in Pennsylvania 
ing of the economies of the middle-Atlantic 
states during 1992.13 Unemployment rates = 0 for stores in New Jersey with 
in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New York 
all trended upward between 1991 and 1993, 
with a larger increase in New Jersey than 
Pennsylvania during 1992. Since sales of 
franchised fast-food restaurants are pro- for other stores in New Jersey. 
cyclical, the rise in unemployment would be 
expected to lower fast-food employment in GAP, is the proportional increase in wages 
the absence of other factors.14 at store i necessary to meet the new mini- 

mum rate. Variation in GAP, reflects both 
B. Regression-Adjusted Models the New Jersey-Pennsylvania contrast and 

differences within New Jersey based on re- 
The comparisons in Table 3 make no ported starting wages in wave 1. Indeed, the 

allowance for other sources of variation in value of GAP, is a strong predictor of the 
employment growth, such as differences actual proportional wage change between 
across chains. These are incorporated in the waves 1 and 2 (R* = 0.75), and conditional 
estimates in Table 4. The entries in this on GAP, there is no difference in wage 
table are regression coefficients from mod- behavior between stores in New Jersey and 

Pennsylvania. l5 

The estimate in column (i) of Table 4 
is directly comparable to the simple 

13 difference-in-differences of employment 
An alternative possibility is that seasonal factors 

produce higher employment at fast-food restaurants in changes in column (iv), row 4 of Table 3. 
February and March than in November and December. T h e  discrepancy between the two 
An analysis of national employment data for food estimates is due to the restricted sample in 
preparation and service workers, however, shows higher Table 4. In Table 4 and the remaining ta- 
average employment in the fourth quarter than in the 
first quarter. bles in this section we restrict our analysis 

14To investigate the cyclicality of fast-food restau- to the set of stores with available employ- 
rant sales we regressed the year-to-year change in U.S. ment and wage data in both waves of the 
sales of the McDonald's restaurant chain from 
1976-1991 on the corresponding change in the unem- 
ployment rate. The regression results show that a 
1-percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate 1 5 re~gression of the proportional wage change be- 
reduces sales by $257 million, with a t statistic of 3.0. tween waves 1 and 2 on GAP, has a coefficient of 1.03. 



THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVlEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

TABLE3 -AVERAGE EMPLOYMENPTE 	R STOREB EFOREA ND I ~ E TRHE  R
ISE 
IN NEW JERSEYM INIMUMW AGE 


Stores by state Stores in New Jersey a Differences within N J ~  
Difference, Wage = Wage = Wage r Low- Midrange-

PA NJ NJ-PA $4.25 $4.26-$4.99 $5.00 high high 
Variable (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) (viii) 

1. FTE employment before, 
all available observations 

2. FTE employment after, 
all available observations 

3. Change in mean FTE 
employment 

4. Change in mean FTE 
employment, balanced 
sample of storesC 

5. Change in mean FTE 
employment, setting 
FTE at temporarily 
closed stores to O d  

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample consists of all stores with available data on employment. FTE 
(full-time-equivalent) employment counts each part-time worker as half a full-time worker. Employment at six closed stores 
is set to zero. Employment at four temporarily closed stores is treated as missing. 

astares in New Jersey were classified by whether starting wage in wave 1 equals $4.25 per hour ( N  = 101), is between 
$4.26 and $4.99 per hour ( N  = 140), or is $5.00 per hour or higher ( N  = 73). 

b~ i f fe rencein employment between low-wage ($4.25 per hour) and high-wage ( 2$5.00 per hour) stores; and difference 
in employment between midrange ($4.26-$4.99 per hour) and high-wage stores. 

'Subset of stores with available employment data in wave 1 and wave 2. 
this row only, wave-2 employment at four temporarily closed stores is set to 0. Employment changes are based on the 

subset of stores with available employment data in wave 1 and wave 2. 

TABLE4 -REDUCED-FORM MODELSF OR CHANGEI N EMPLOYMENT 

Model 
Independent variable (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) 

1. New Jersey dummy 2.33 2.30 - - -
(1.19) (1.20) 

2. Initial wage gapa - - 15.65 14.92 11.91 
(6.08) (6.21) (7.39) 

3. Controls for chain and 	 no  yes no  yes yes 
ownershipb 

4. Controls for regionC 
5. Standard error of regression 
6. Probability value for controlsd 

Notes: Standard errors a re  given in parentheses. T h e  sample consists of 357 stores 
with available data  on  employment and starting wages in waves 1 and 2. The  
dependent variable in all models is change in F T E  employment. T h e  mean and 
standard deviation of the dependent variable are  -0.237 and 8.825, respectively. All 
models include a n  unrestricted constant (not reported). 

aProportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise starting wage to  new 
minimum rate. For stores in Pennsylvania the wage gap is 0. 

b ~ h r e deummy variables for chain type and whether or  not the store is company- 
owned are included. 

'Dummy variables for two regions of New Jersey and two regions of eastern 
Pennsylvania are  included. 

d~robab i l i tyvalue of joint F test for exclusion of all control variables. 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 781 

survey. This restriction results in a slightly null hypothesis of a zero employment effect 
smaller estimate of the relative increase in of the minimum wage. One explanation for 
employment in New Jersey. this attenuation is the presence of measure- 

The model in column (ii) introduces a ment error in the starting wage. Even if 
set of four control variables: dummies for employment growth has no regional compo- 
three of the chains and another dummy for nent, the addition of region dummies will 
company-owned stores. As shown by the lead to some attenuation of the estimated 
probability values in row 6, these covariates GAP coefficient if some of the true varia- 
add little to the model and have no effect tion in GAP is explained by region. Indeed, 
on the size of the estimated New Jersey calculations based on the estimated reliabil- 
dummy. ity of the GAP variable (from the set of 11 

The specifications in columns (iiil-(v) use double interviews) suggest that the fall in 
the GAP variable to measure the effect of the estimated GAP coefficient from column 
the minimum wage. This variable gives a (iv) to column (v) is just equal to the ex-
slightly better fit than the simple New Jer- pected change attributable to measurement 
sey dummy, although its implications for the error.16 
New Jersey-Pennsylvania comparison are We have also estimated the models in 
similar. The mean value of GAPi among Table 4 using as a dependent variable the 
New Jersey stores is 0.11. Thus the estimate proportional change in employment at each 
in column (iii) implies a 1.72 increase in store.17 The estimated coefficients of the 
FTE employment in New Jersey relative to New Jersey dummy and the GAP variable 
Pennsylvania. are uniformly positive in these models but 

Since GAP, varies within New Jersey, it is insignificantly different from 0 at conven-
possible to add both GAP, and NJ, to the tional levels. The implied employment ef- 
employment model. The estimated coeffi- fects of the minimum wage are also smaller 
cient of the New Jersey dummy then pro- when the dependent variable is expressed in 
vides a test of the Pennsylvania control proportional terms. For example, the GAP 
group. When we estimate these models, the coefficient in column (iii) of Table 4 implies 
coefficient of the New Jersey dummy is in- that the increase in minimum wages raised 
significant (with t ratios of 0.3-0.7), imply- employment at New Jersey stores that were 
ing that inferences about the effect of the initially paying $4.25 per hour by 14 per- 
minimum wage are similar whether the cent. The estimated GAP coefficient from a 
comparison is made across states or across corresponding proportional model implies 
stores in New Jersey with higher and lower an effect of only 7 percent. The difference is 
initial wages. attributable to heterogeneity in the effect of 

An even stronger test is provided in col- the minimum wage at larger and smaller 
umn (v), where we have added dummies stores. Weighted versions of the propor-
representing three regions of New Jersey tional-change models (using initial employ- 
(North, Central, and South) and two regions ment as a weight) give rise to wage elastici- 
of eastern Pennsylvania (Allentown-Easton 
and the northern suburbs of Philadelphia). 
These dummies control for any region-
s~ecificd emand shocks and identifv the ef- 16In a regression model without other controls the 
feet of the minimum wage by expected attenuation of the GAP coefficient due to 
employment changes at higher- and lower- measurement error is the reliability ratio of GAP (yo), 

wage within the same region of New which we estimate at 0.70. The expected attenuation 
factor when region dummies are added to the model is 

Jersey. The probability value in row 6 shows y l  = (Yo- ~ 2 ) / ( 1 -  ~ 2 ) w,  here ~2 is the R-square 
no evidence of regional components in em- statistic of a regression of GAP on region effects (equal 
ployment growth. The addition of the re- to 0.30). Thus, we expect the estimated GAP coeffi- 
gion dummies attenuates the GAP coeffi- cient to fall by a factor of Y I  / Y O  = 0.8 when region 

dummies are added to a regression model. 
cient and raises its standard error, however, " ~ h e s e  specifications are reported in table 4 of 
making it no longer possible to reject the Card and Krueger (1993). 



782 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER I994 

ties similar to the elasticities implied by the little effect on the models for the level of 
estimates in Table 4 (see below). employment but yield slightly smaller point 

estimates in the proportional-employment- 
C. Specification Tests change models. 

In row 6 we present estimates obtained 
The results in Tables 3 and 4 seem to from a subsample that excludes 35 stores in 

contradict the standard prediction that a towns along the New Jersey shore. The ex- 
rise in the minimum wage will reduce em- clusion of these stores, which may have a 
ployment. Table 5 presents some alternative different seasonal pattern than other stores 
specifications that probe the robustness of in our sample, leads to slightly larger mini- 
this conclusion. For completeness, we re- mum-wage effects. A similar finding emerges 
port estimates of models for the change in in row 7 when we add a set of dummy 
employment [columns (i) and (ii)] and esti- variables that indicate the week of the 
mates of models for the proportional change wave-2 inter vie^.^' 
in employment [columns (iii) and (iv)].18 The As noted earlier, we made an extra effort 
first row of the table reproduces the "base to obtain responses from New Jersey stores 
specification" from columns (ii) and (iv) of in the first wave of our survey. The fraction 
Table 4. (Note that these models include of stores called three or more times to ob- 
chain dummies and a dummy for company- tain an interview was higher in New Jersey 
owned stores). Row 2 presents an alterna- than in Pennsylvania. To check the sensitiv- 
tive set of estimates when we set wave-2 ity of our results to this sampling feature, 
employment at the temporarily closed stores we reestimated our models on a subsample 
to 0 (expanding our sample size by 4). This that excludes any stores that were called 
change has a small attenuating effect on the back more than twice. The results, in row 8, 
coefficient of the New Jersey dummy (since are very similar to the base specification. 
all four stores are in New Jersey) but less Row 9 presents weighted estimation re- 
effect on the GAP coefficient (since the size sults for the proportional-employment-
of GAP is uncorrelated with the probability change models, using as weights the initial 
of a temporary closure within New Jersey). levels of employment in each store. Since 

Rows 3-5 present estimation results us- the proportional change in average employ- 
ing alternative measures of full-time-equiv- ment is an employment-weighted average of 
alent employment. In row 3, employment is the proportional changes at each store, a 
redefined to exclude management employ- weighted version of the proportional-change 
ees. This change has no effect relative to model should give rise to elasticities that 
the base specification. In rows 4 and 5, we are similar to the implied elasticities arising 
include managers in FTE employment but from the levels models. Consistent with this 
reweight part-time workers as either 40 per- expectation, the weighted estimates are 
cent or 60 percent of full-time workers (in- larger than the unweighted estimates, and 
stead of 50 percent).19 These changes have significantly different from 0 at conventional 

levels. The weighted estimate of the New 
Jersey dummy (0.13) implies a 13-percent 
relative increase in New Jersey employment 

18The proportional change in employment is de- -the same proportional employment effect 
fined as the change in employment divided by the implied by the simple difference-in-dif-
average level of employment in waves 1 and 2. This ferences in Table 3. Similarly, the weighted 
results in very similar coefficients but smaller standard 
errors than the alternative of dividing by wave-1 em- estimate of the GAP coefficient in the 
ployment. For closed stores we set the proportional proportional-change model (0.81) is close to 
change in employment to - 1. 

19Analysis of the 1991 Current Population Survey 
reveals that part-time workers in the restaurant indus- 
try work about 46 percent as many hours as full-time 
workers. Katz and Krueger (1992) report that the ratio 20We also added dummies for the interview dates 
of part-time workers' hours to full-time workers' hours for the wave-1 survey, but these were insignificant and 
in the fast-food industry is 0.57. did not change the estimated minimum-wage effects. 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 783 

Proportional change 
Change in employment in employment 

NJ dummy Gap measure NJ dummy Gap measure 
Specification (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) 

1. Base specification 	 2.30 14.92 
(1.19) (6.21) 

2. Treat four temporarily closed stores 

as permanently closeda 


3. Exclude managers in employment 

countb 


4. Weight part-time as 0.4 x full-timec 

5. Weight part-time as 0.6 X full-timed 

6. Exclude stores in NJ shore areae 

7. Add controls for wave-2 interview 

dateE 


8. 	Exclude stores called more than twice 

in wave lg 


9. Weight by initial employmenth 

10. Stores in towns around Newark' - 33.75 
(16.75) 

11. Stores in towns around CamdenJ - 10.91 
(14.09) 

12. Pennsylvania stores only 	 - -0.30 
(22.00) 

Notes: Standard errors are given in parentheses. Entries represent estimated coefficient of New Jersey dummy 
[columns (i) and (iii)] or initial wage gap [columns (ii) and (iv)] in regression models for the change in employment 
or the percentage change in employment. All models also include chain dummies and an indicator for company- 
owned stores. 

aWave-2 employment at four temporarily closed stores is set to 0 (rather than missing). 

b~ull-t imequivalent employment excludes managers and assistant managers. 

CFull-time equivalent employment equals number of managers, assistant managers, and full-time nonmanage- 


ment workers, plus 0.4 times the number of part-time nonmanagement workers. 
d~ull-t imee quivalent employment equals number of managers, assistant managers, and full-time nonmanage- 

ment workers, plus 0.6 times the number of part-time nonmanagement workers. 
eSample excludes 35 stores located in towns along the New Jersey shore. 
' ~ o d e l sin clude three dummy variables identifying week of wave-2 interview in November-December 1992. 
gSample excludes 70 stores (69 in New Jersey) that were contacted three or more times before obtaining the 

wave-1 interview. 
h~egressionmodel is estimated by weighted least squares, using employment in wave 1 as a weight. 
i 

. 	Subsample of 51 stores in towns around Newark. 
Subsample of 54 stores in town around Camden. 
Subsample of Pennsylvania stores only. Wage gap is defined as percentage increase in starting wage necessary 

to raise starting wage to $5.05. 



784 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

the implied elasticity of employment with We have also investigated whether the 
respect to wages from the basic levels speci- first-differenced specification used in our 
fication in row 1, column (iiI2l These find- employment models is appropriate. A 
ings suggest that the proportional effect of first-differenced model implies that the level 
the rise in the minimum wage was concen- of employment in period t is related to the 
trated among larger stores. lagged level of employment with a coeffi-

One explanation for our finding that a cient of 1. If short-run employment fluctua- 
rise in the minimum wage has a positive tions are smoothed, however, the true co- 
employment effect is that unobserved de- efficient of lagged employment may be less 
mand shocks within New Jersey outweighed than 1. Imposing the assumption of a unit 
the negative employment effect of the mini- coefficient may then lead to biases. To test 
mum wage. To address this possibility, rows the first-differenced specification we reesti- 
10 and 11 present estimation results based mated models for the change in employ- 
on subsamples of stores in two narrowly ment including wave-1 employment as an 
defined areas: towns around Newark (row additional explanatory variable. To over-
10) and towns around Camden (row 11). In come any mechanical correlation between 
each case the sample area is identified by base-period employment and the change in 
the first three digits of the store's zip code.22 employment (attributable to measurement 
Within both areas the change in employ- error) we instrumented wave-1 employment 
ment is positively correlated with the GAP with the number of cash registers in the 
variable, although in neither case is the store in wave 1 and the number of registers 
effect statistically significant. To the extent in the store that were open at 11:OO A.M. In 
that fast-food product market conditions are all of the specifications the coefficient of 
constant within local areas, these results wave-1 employment is close to zero. For 
suggest that our findings are not driven by example, in a specification including the 
unobserved demand shocks. Our analysis of GAP variable and ownership and chain 
price changes (reported below) also sup- dummies, the coefficient of wave-1 employ- 
ports this conclusion. ment is 0.04, with a standard error of 0.24. 

A final specification check is presented in We conclude that the first-differenced spec- 
row 12 of Table 5. In this row we exclude ification is appropriate. 
stores in New Jersey and (incorrectly) de- 
fine the GAP variable for Pennsylvania D. Full-Time and Part-Time Substitution 
stores as the proportional increase in wages 
necessary to raise the wage to $5.05 per Our analysis so far has concentrated on 
hour. In principle the size of the wage gap full-time-equivalent employment and ig-
for stores in Pennsylvania should have no nored possible changes in the distribution 
systematic relation with employment growth. of full- and part-time workers. An increase 
In practice, this is the case. There is no in the minimum wage could lead to an in- 
indication that the wage gap is spuriously crease in full-time employment relative to 
related to employment growth. part-time employment for at least two rea- 

sons. First, in a conventional model one 
would expect a minimum-wage increase to 
induce employers to substitute skilled work- 
ers and capital for minimum-wage workers. 
Full-time workers in fast-food restaurants 

21~ssuminga verage employment of 20.4 in New 
Jersey, the 14.92 GAP coefficient in row 1, column (ii) are typically older and may well possess 
im lies an employment elasticity of 0.73. higher skills than part-time workers. Thus, a 

"The "070" three-digit zip-code area (around conventional model predicts that stores may 
Newark) and the "080" three-digit zip-code area respond to an increase in the minimum 
(around Camden) have by far the largest numbers of 
stores among three-digit zip-code areas in New Jersey, wage by increasing the proportion of full- 
and together they account for 36 percent of New Jersey time workers. Nevertheless, 81 percent of 
stores in our sample. restaurants paid full-time and part-time 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 785 

Regression of change in 
Mean change in outcome outcome variable on: 
NJ PA NJ -PA NJ dummy Wage gapa Wage gapb 

Outcome measure (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) 

Store Characteristics: 

1. Fraction full-time workersc (percentage) 

2. Number of hours open per weekday 

3. Number of cash registers 

4. Number of cash registers open 
at 11:OO A.M. 

Employee Meal Programs: 

5. Low-price meal program (percentage) 

6. Free meal program (percentage) 

7. Combination of low-price and free 
meals (percentage) 

Wage Profile: 

8. Time to first raise (weeks) 

9. Usual amount of first raise (cents) 

10. Slope of wage profile (percent 
per week) 

Notes: Entries in columns (i) and (ii) represent mean changes in the outcome variable indicated by the row heading 
for stores with available data on the outcome in waves 1 and 2. Entries in columns (iv)-(vi) represent estimated 
regression coefficients of indicated variable (NJ dummy or initial wage gap) in models for the change in the 
outcome variable. Regression models include chain dummies and an indicator for company-owned stores. 

aThe wage gap is the proportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise the wage to the new minimum 
rate. For stores in Pennsylvania, the wage gap is zero. 

b ~ o d e lisn column (vi) include dummies for two regions of New Jersey and two regions of eastern Pennsylvania. 
'Fraction of part-time employees in total full-time-equivalent employment. 

workers exactly the same starting wage in workers are more productive (but equally 
wave 1of our survey.23 This suggests either paid), there may be a second reason for 
that full-time workers have the same skills stores to substitute full-time workers for 
as part-time workers or that equity concerns part-time workers; namely, a minimum-wage 
lead restaurants to pay equal wages for un- increase enables the industry to attract more 
equally productive workers. If full-time full-time workers, and stores would natu-

rally want to hire a greater proportion of 
full-time workers if they are more produc- 
tive. 

231n the other 19 percent of stores, full-time workers Row 1 of Table 6 presents the mean 
are paid more, typically 10 percent more. changes in the proportion of full-time work- 



786 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

ers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania be- ployment costs unchanged. The main fringe 
tween waves 1 and 2 of our survey, and benefits for fast-food employees are free 
coefficient estimates from regressions of the and reduced-price meals. In the first wave 
change in the proportion of full-time work- of our survey about 19 percent of fast-food 
ers on the wage-gap variable, chain dum- restaurants offered workers free meals. 72 
mies, a company-ownership dummy, and re- percent offered reduced-price meals, a i d  9 
gion dummies [in column (41 .  The results percent offered a combination of both free 
are ambiguous. The fraction of full-time and reduced-price meals. Low-price meals 
workers increased in New Jersey relative to are an obvious fringe benefit to cut if the 
Pennsylvania by 7.3 percent (t ratio = 1.841, minimum-wage increase forces restaurants 
but regressions on the wage-gap variable to pay higher wages. 
show no significant shift in the fraction of Rows 5 and 6 of Table 6 present esti- 
full-time workers.24 mates of the effect of the minimum-wage 

increase on the incidence of free meals and 
E. Other Employment-Related Measures reduced-price meals. The proportion of res- 

taurants offering reduced-price meals fell 
Rows 2-4 of Table 6 present results for in both New Jersey and Pennsylvania after 

other outcome variables that we expect to the minimum wage increased, with a some- 
be related to the level of restaurant employ- what greater decline in New Jersey. Con- 
ment. In particular, we examine whether trary to an offset story, however, the reduc- 
the rise in the minimum wage is associated tion in reduced-price meal programs was 
with a change in the number of hours a accompanied by an increase in the fraction 
restaurant is open on a weekday, the num- of stores offering free meals. Relative to 
ber of cash registers in the restaurant, and stores in Pennsylvania, New Jersey employ- 
the number of cash registers typically in ers actually shifted toward more generous 
operation in the restaurant at 11:OO A.M. fringe benefits (i.e., free meals rather than 
Consistent with our employment results, reduced-price meals). However, the relative 
none of these variables shows a statistically shift is not statistically significant. 
significant decline in New Jersey relative to We continue to find a statistically in-
Pennsylvania. Similarly, regressions includ- significant effect of the minimum-wage in- 
ing the gap variable provide no evidence crease on the likelihood of receiving free or 
that the minimum-wage increase led to a reduced-price meals in columns (v) and (vi), 
systematic change in any of these variables where we report coefficient estimates of the 
[see columns (v) and (vi)]. GAP variable from regression models for 

the change in the incidence of these pro- 
IV. Nonwage Offsets grams. The results provide no evidence that 

employers offset the minimum-wage in-
One explanation of our finding that a rise crease by reducing free or reduced-price 

in the minimum wage does not lower em- meals. 
ployment is that restaurants can offset the Another possibility is that employers re- 
effect of the minimum wage by reducing sponded to the increase in the minimum 
nonwage compensation. For example, if wage by reducing on-the-job training and 
workers value fringe benefits and wages flattening the tenure-wage profile (see 
equally, employers can simply reduce the Jacob Mincer and Linda Leighton, 1981). 
level of fringe benefits by the amount of the Indeed, one manager told our interviewer in 
minimum-wage increase, leaving their em- wave 1that her workers were forgoing ordi- 

nary scheduled raises because the minimum 
wage was about to rise, and this would 
provide a raise for all her workers. To de- 

2 4 ~ i t h i nNew Jersey, the fraction of full-time em- termine whether this phenomenon occurred 
ployees increased about as quickly at stores with higher more generally, we analyzed store man-
and lower wages in wave 1. agers' responses to questions on the amount 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 787 

of time before a normal wage increase and factor cost. The average restaurant in New 
the usual amount of such raises. In rows 8 Jersey initially paid about half its workers 
and 9 we report the average changes be- less than the new minimum wage. If wages 
tween waves 1 and 2 for these two variables, rose by roughly 15 percent for these work- 
as well as regression coefficients from mod- ers, and if labor's share of total costs is 30 
els that include the wage-gap variable.25A l- percent, we would expect prices to rise by 
though the average time to the first pay about 2.2 percent ( = 0.15 X 0.5 X 0.3) due to 
raise increased by 2.5 weeks in New Jersey the minimum-wage rise.27 
relative to Pennsylvania, the increase is not In each wave of our survey we asked 
statistically significant. Furthermore, there managers for the prices of three standard 
is only a trivial difference in the relative items: a medium soda, a small order of 
change in the amount of the first pay incre- french fries, and a main course. The main 
ment between New Jersey and Pennsylvania course was a basic hamburger at Burger 
stores. King, Roy Rogers, and Wendy's restaurants, 

Finally, we examined a related variable: and two pieces of chicken at KFC stores. 
the "slope" of the wage profile, which we We define "full meal" price as the after-tax 
measure by the ratio of the typical first raise price of a medium soda, a small order of 
to the amount of time until the first raise is french fries, and a main course. 
given. As shown in row 10, the slope of the Table 7 presents reduced-form estimates 
wage profile flattened in both New Jersey of the effect of the minimum-wage increase 
and Pennsylvania, with no significant rela- on prices. The dependent variable in these 
tive difference between states. The change models is the change in the logarithm of the 
in the slope is also uncorrelated with the price of a full meal at each store. The key 
GAP variable. In summary, we can find no independent variable is either a dummy in- 
indication that New Jersey employers dicating whether the store is located in New 
changed either their fringe benefits or their Jersey or the proportional wage increase 
wage profiles to offset the rise in the mini- required to meet the minimum wage (the 
mum wage.26 GAP variable defined above). 

The estimated New Jersey dummy in col- 
V. Price Effects of the Minimum-Wage 
 umn (i) shows that after-tax meal prices 

Increase 
 rose 3.2-percent faster in New Jersey than 
in Pennsylvania between February and 

A final issue we examine is the effect of November 1 9 9 2 . ~T~he effect is slightly 
the minimum wage on the prices of meals at larger controlling for chain and company- 
fast-food restaurants. A competitive model ownership [see column ($1. Since the 
of the fast-food industry implies that an New Jersey sales tax rate fell by 1 percent- 
increase in the minimum wage will lead to age point between the waves of our survey, 
an increase in product prices. If we assume these estimates suggest that pretax prices 
constant returns to scale in the industry, the rose 4-percent faster as a result of the 
increase in price should be proportional to 
the share of minimum-wage labor in total 

" ~ c c o r d i n ~to the McDonald's Corporation 1991 
Annual Report. payroll and benefits are 31.3 percent of 
operating costs at company-owned stores. This calcula- 

2 5 ~ nwave 1, the average time to a first wage in- tion is only approximate because minimum-wage work- 
crease was 18.9 weeks, and the average amount of the ers make up less than half of payroll even though they 
first increase was $0.21 per hour. are about half of workers, and because a rise in the 

2 6 ~ a taznd Krueger (1992) report that a significant minimum wage causes some employers to increase the 
fraction of fast-food stores in Texas responded to an pay of other higher-wage workers in order to maintain 
increase in the minimum wage by raising wages for relative pay differentials. 
workers who were initially earning more than the new he effect is attributable to a 2.0-percent increase 
minimum rate. Our results on the slope of the tenure in prices in New Jersey and a 1.0-percent decrease in 
profile are consistent with their findings. prices in Pennsylvania. 



THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

TABLE7 -REDUCED-FORMM ODELSFO R CHANGIEN  THE PRICEOF A FULLM EAL 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

Dependent variable: change in the log price 
of a full meal 

Independent variable (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) 

1. New Jersey dummy 0.033 0.037 - - -
(0.014) (0.014) 

2. Initial wage gapa - - 0.077 0.146 0.063 
(0.075) (0.074) (0.089) 

3. Controls for chain andb 	 no yes no yes Yes 
ownership 

4. Controls for regionC no no no no yes 
5. Standard error of regression 0.101 0.097 0.102 0.098 0.097 

Notes: Standard errors are given in parentheses. Entries are estimated regression 
coefficients for models fit to the change in the log price of a full meal (entrCe, medium 
soda, small fries). The sample contains 315 stores with valid data on prices, wages, and 
employment for waves 1 and 2. The mean and standard deviation of the dependent 
variable are 0.0173 and 0.1017, respectively. 

aProportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise the wage to the new 
minimum-wage rate. For stores in Pennsylvania the wage gap is 0. 

bThree dummy variables for chain type and whether or not the store is company- 
owned are included. 

'Dummy variables for two regions of New Jersey and two regions of eastern 
Pennsylvania are included. 

minimum-wage increase in New Jersey- One potential explanation for the latter 
slightly more than the increase needed to finding is that stores in New Jersey compete 
pass through the cost increase caused by the in the same product market. As a result, 
minimum-wage hike. restaurants that are most affected by the 

The pattern of price changes within New minimum wage are unable to increase their 
Jersey is less consistent with a simple product prices faster than their competitors. 
"pass-through" view of minimum-wage cost In contrast, stores in New Jersey and Penn- 
increases. In fact, meal prices rose at sylvania are in separate product markets, 
approximately the same rate at stores in enabling prices to rise in New Jersey rela- 
New Jersey with differing levels of initial tive to Pennsylvania when overall costs rise 
wages. Inspection of the estimated GAP in New Jersey. Note that this explanation 
coefficients in column (v) of Table 7 con- seems to rule out the possibility that store- 
firms that within regions of New Jersey, the specific demand shocks can account for the 
GAP variable is statistically insignificant. anomalous rise in employment at stores in 

In sum, these results provide mixed evi- New Jersey with lower initial wages. 
dence that higher minimum wages result in 
higher fast-food prices. The strongest evi- VI. Store Openings 
dence emerges from a comparison of New 
Jersey and Pennsylvania stores. The magni- An important potential effect of higher 
tude of the price increase is consistent with minimum wages is to discourage the open- 
predictions from a conventional model of a ing of new businesses. Although our sample 
competitive industry. On the other hand, we design allows us to estimate the effect of the 
find no evidence that prices rose faster minimum wage on existing restaurants in 
among stores in New Jersey that were most New Jersey, we cannot address the effect of 
affected by the rise in the minimum wage. the higher minimum wage on potential 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 789 

entrants.29 To assess the likely size of such tive effect on either the net number of 
an effect, we used national restaurant direc- restaurants or the rate of new openings. To 
tories for the McDonald's restaurant chain the contrary, all the estimates show positice 
to compare the numbers of operating effects of higher minimum wages on the 
restaurants and the numbers of newly number of operating or newly opened stores, 
opened restaurants in different states over although many of the point estimates are 
the 1986-1991 period. Many states raised insignificantly different from zero. While this 
their minimum wages during this period. In evidence is limited, we conclude that the 
addition, the federal minimum wage in- effects of minimum wages on fast-food store 
creased in the early 1990's from $3.35 to opening rates are probably small. 
$4.25, with differing effects in different states 
depending on the level of wages in the VII. Broader Evidence on Employment 

state. These policies create an opportunity Changes in New Jersey 

to measure the impact of minimum-wage 
laws on store opening rates across states. Our establishment-level analysis suggests 

The results of our analysis are presented that the rise in the minimum wage in New 
in Table 8. We regressed the growth rate in Jersey may have increased employment in 
the number of McDonald's stores in each the fast-food industry. Is this just an anomaly 
state on two alternative measures of the associated with our particular sample, or a 
minimum wage in the state and a set of phenomenon unique to the fast-food indus- 
other control variables (population growth try? Data from the monthly Current Popu- 
and the change in the state unemployment lation Survey (CPS) allow us to compare 
rate). The first minimum-wage measure is state-wide employment trends in New Jer- 
the fraction of workers in the state's retail sey and the surrounding states, providing a 
trade industry in 1986 whose wages fell be- check on the interpretation of our findings. 
tween the existing federal minimum wage in Using monthly CPS files for 1991 and 1992, 
1986 ($3.35 per hour) and the effective min- we computed employment-population rates 
imum wage in the state in April 1990 (the for teenagers and adults (age 25 and older) 
maximum of the federal minimum wage and for New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York, 
the state minimum wages as of April 1990)." and the entire United States. Since the New 
The second is the ratio of the state's effec- Jersey minimum wage rose on April 1, 1992, 
tive minimum wage in 1990 to the average we computed the employment rates for 
hourly wage of retail trade workers in the April-December of both 1991 and 1992. 
state in 1986. Both of these measures are The relative changes in employment in New 
designed to gauge the degree of upward Jersey and the surrounding states then give 
wage pressure exerted by state or federal an indication of the effect of the new law. 
minimum-wage changes between 1986 and A comparison of changes in adult em-
1990. ployment rates show that the New Jersey 

The results provide no evidence that labor market fared slightly worse over the 
higher minimum-wage rates (relative to the 1991-1992 period than either the U.S. labor 
retail-trade wages in a state) exert a nega- market as a whole or labor markets in 

Pennsylvania or New York (see Card and 
Krueger, 1993 table 9l3'  Among teenagers, 
however, the situation was reversed. In New 

29Direct inquiries to the chains in our sample re- Jersey, teenage employment rates fell by 0.7 
vealed that Wendy's opened two stores in New Jersey 
in 1992 and one store in Pennsylvania. The other percent from 1991 to 1992. In New York, 
chains were unwilling to provide information on new 
openings.

30We used the 1986 Current Population Survey 
(merged monthly file) to construct the minimum-wage 31The employment rate of individuals age 25 and 
variables. State minimum-wage rates in 1990 were ob- older fell by 2.6 percent in New Jersey between 1991 
tained from the Bureau of National Affairs Labor and 1992, while it rose by 0.3 percent in Pennsylvania, 
Relations Reporter Wages and Hours Manual (undated). and fell by 0.2 percent in the United States as a whole. 



790 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

Dependent variable: 
Dependent variable: proportional (number of newly opened stores)+ 

increase in number of stores (number in 1986) 
Independent variable (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) (viii) 

Minimum- Wage Variable: 

1. Fraction of retail workers 	 0.33 - 0.13 - 0.37 - 0.16 -
in affected wage range 1986" (0.20) (0.19) (0.22) (0.21) 

2. (State minimum wage in 1991)+ 	 - 0.38 - 0.47 - 0.47 - 0.56 
(average retail wage in 1986Ib (0.22) (0.22) (0.23) (0.24) 

Other Control Variables: 

3. Proportional growth in 	 - - 0.88 1.03 - - 0.86 1.04 
population, 1986-1991 (0.23) (0.23) (0.25) (0.25) 

4. Change in unemployment 	 - - -1.78 -1.40 - - - 1.85 - 1.40 
rates, 1986-1991 (0.62) (0.61) (0.68) (0.65) 

5. Standard error of regression 0.083 0.083 0.071 0.068 0.088 0.088 0.077 0.073 

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample contains 51 state-level observations (including the 
District of Columbia) on the number of McDonald's restaurants open in 1986 and 1991. The dependent variable in 
columns (i)-(iv) is the proportional increase in the number of restaurants open. The mean and standard deviation 
are 0.246 and 0.085, respectively. The dependent variable in columns (v)-(viii) is the ratio of the number of new 
stores opened between 1986 and 1991 to the number open in 1986. The mean and standard deviation are 0.293 and 
0.091, respectively. All regressions are weighted by the state population in 1986. 

aFraction of all workers in retail trade in the state in 1986 earning an hourly wage between $3.35 per hour and 
the "effective" state minimum wage in 1990 (i.e., the maximum of the federal minimum wage in 1990 ($3.80) and 
the state minimum wage as of April 1, 1990). 

b ~ a x i m u mo f state and federal minimum wage as of April 1, 1990, divided by the average hourly wage of 
workers in retail trade in the state in 1986. 

Pennsylvania, and the United States as a summarize the predictions of the standard 
whole, teenage employment rates dropped model and some simple alternatives, and we 
faster. Relative to teenagers in Pennsylva- highlight the difficulties posed by our find- 
nia, for example, the teenage employment ings. 
rate in New Jersey rose by 2.0 percentage 
points. While this point estimate is consis- A. Standard Competitive Model 
tent with our findings for the fast-food in- 
dustry, the standard error is too large (3.2 A standard competitive model predicts 
percent) to allow any confident assessment. that establishment-level employment will fall 

if the wage is exogenously raised. For an 
VIII. Interpretation 	 entire industry, total employment is pre- 

dicted to fall, and product price is predicted 
As in the earlier study by Katz and to rise in response to an increase in a bind- 

Krueger (1992), our empirical findings on ing minimum wage. Estimates from the 
the effects of the New Jersey minimum wage time-series literature on minimum-wage ef- 
are inconsistent with the predictions of a fects can be used to get a rough idea of the 
conventional competitive model of the fast- elasticity of low-wage employment to the 
food industry. Our employment results are minimum wage. The surveys by Brown et al. 
consistent with several alternative models, (1982. 1983) conclude that a 10-~ercenitn - 
although none of these models can also crease in the coverage-adjusted minimum 
explain the apparent rise in fast-food prices wage will reduce teenage employment rates 
in New Jersey. In this section we briefly by 1-3 percent. Since this effect is for all 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 791 

teenagers, and not just those employed in rive the equilibrium wage distribution for a 
low-wage industries, it is surely a lower noncooperative wage-search/wage-posting 
bound on the magnitude of the effect for model and show that the imposition of a 
fast-food workers. The 18-percent increase binding minimum wage can increase both 
in the New Jersey minimum wage is there- wages and employment relative to the initial 
fore predicted to reduce employment at equilibrium. Furthermore, their model pre- 
fast-food stores by 0.4-1.0 employees per dicts that the minimum wage will increase 
store. Our empirical results clearly reject employment the most at firms that initially 
the upper range of these estimates, al- paid the lowest wages. 
though we cannot reject a small negative Although monopsonistic and job-search 
effect in some of our specifications. models provide a potential explanation for 

A possible defense of the competitive the observed employment effects of the New 
model is that unobserved demand shocks Jersey minimum wage, they cannot explain 
affected certain stores in New Jersey- the observed price effects. In these models, 
specifically, those stores that were initially industry prices should have fallen in New 
paying wages less than $5.00 per hour. How- Jersey relative to Pennsylvania, and at low- 
ever, such localized demand shocks should wage stores in New Jersey relative to high- 
also affect product prices. (In fact, in a wage stores in New Jersey. Neither predic- 
competitive model, product demand shocks tion is confirmed: indeed, prices rose faster 
work through a rise in prices.) Although in New Jersey than in Pennsylvania, al-
lower-wage stores in New Jersey had rela- though at about the same rate at high- and 
tive employment gains, they did not have low-wage stores in New Jersey. Another 
relative price increases. Furthermore, our puzzle for equilibrium search models is the 
analysis of employment changes in two ma- absence of wage increases at firms that were 
jor suburban areas (around Newark and initially paying $5.05 or more per hour. 
Camden) reveals that, even within local The strict link between the employment 
areas, employment rose faster at the stores and price effects of a rise in the minimum 
that had to increase wages the most because wage may be broken if fast-food stores can 
of the new minimum wage. vary the quality of service (e.g., the length of 

the queue at peak hours, or the cleanliness 
B. Alternative Models of stores). Another possibility is that stores 

altered the relative prices of their various 
An alternative to the conventional com- menu items. Comparisons of price changes 

petitive model is one in which firms are for the three items in our survey show slight 
price-takers in the product market but have declines (-1.5 percent) in the price of 
some degree of market power in the labor french fries and soda in New Jersey relative 
market. If fast-food stores face an upward- to Pennsylvania, coupled with a relative in- 
sloping labor-supply schedule, a rise in the crease (8 percent) in entrCe prices. These 
minimum wage can potentially increase em- limited data suggest a possible role for rela- 
ployment at affected firms and in the indus- tive price changes within the fast-food in- 
try as a whole.32 dustry following the rise in the minimum 

This same basic insight emerges from an wage. 
equilibrium search model in which firms One way to test a monopsony model is to 
post wages and employees search among identify stores that were initially "supply- 
posted offers (see Dale T. Mortensen, 1988). constrained" in the labor market and test 
Kenneth Burdett and Mortensen (1989) de- for employment gains at these stores rela- 

tive to other stores. A potential indicator of 
market power is the use of recruitment 
bonuses. As we noted in Table 2, about 25 

" ~ a n i e l  G. Sullivan (1989) and Michael R Ransom 
(1993) present empirical results for nurses and univer- percent of stores in wave 1 were offering 
sity teachers that suggest monopsony-like behavior of cash bonuses to employees who helped find 
employers. a new worker. We compared employment 



792 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1994 

changes at New Jersey stores that were of- affected by the minimum-wage rise. Taken 
fering recruitment bonuses in wave 1, and as a whole, these findings are difficult to 
also interacted the GAP variable with a explain with the standard competitive model 
dummy for recruitment bonuses in several or with models in which employers face 
employment-change models. We do not find supply constraints (e.g., monopsony or equi- 
faster (or slower) employment growth at the librium search models). 
New Jersey stores that were initially using 
recruitment bonuses, or any evidence that 
the GAP variable had a larger effect for REFERENCES 
stores that were using bonuses. 

Brown, Charles; Gilroy, Curtis and Kohen, An- 
IX. Conclusions drew. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage 

on Employment and Unemployment." 
Contrary to the central prediction of the Journal of Economic Literature, June 1982, 

textbook model of the minimum wage, but 20(2), pp. 487-528. 
consistent with a number of recent studies . "Time Series Evidence on the Ef- 
based on cross-sectional time-series com- fect of the Minimum Wage on Youth 
parisons of affected and unaffected markets Employment and Unemployment." Jour- 
or employers, we find no evidence that the nal of Human Resources, Winter 1983, 
rise in New Jersey's minimum wage reduced 18(1), pp. 3-31. 
employment at fast-food restaurants in the Burdett, Kenneth and Mortensen, Dale T. 
state. Regardless of whether we compare "Equilibrium Wage Differentials and 
stores in New Jersey that were affected by Employer Size." Center for Mathematical 
the $5.05 minimum to stores in eastern Studies in Economics and Management 
Pennsylvania (where the minimum wage was Science Discussion Paper No. 860, North- 
constant at $4.25 per hour) or to stores in western University, October 1989. 
New Jersey that were initially paying $5.00 Bureau of National Affairs. Daily Labor Re- 
per hour or more (and were largely unaf- port. Washington, DC: Bureau of Na-
fected by the new law), we find that the tional Affairs, 5 May 1990. 
increase in the minimum wage increased .Labor Relations Reporter Wages and 
employment. We present a wide variety of Hours Manual. Washington, DC: Bureau 
alternative specifications to probe the ro- of National Affairs, irregular. 
bustness of this conclusion. None of the Card, David. "Using Regional Variation in 
alternatives shows a negative employment Wages To Measure the Effects of the 
effect. We also check our findings for the Federal Minimum Wage." Industrial and 
fast-food industry by comparing changes in Labor Relations Reuiew, October 1992a, 
teenage employment rates in New Jersey, 46(1), pp. 22-37. 
Pennsylvania, and New York in the year . "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Em- 
following the increase in the minimum wage. ployment? A Case Study of California, 
Again, these results point toward a relative 1987-89." Industrial and Labor Relations 
increase in employment of low-wage work- Reuiew, October 1992b, 46(1), pp. 38-54. 
ers in New Jersey. We also find no evidence Card, David and Krueger, Alan B. "Minimum 
that minimum-wage increases negatively Wages and Employment: A Case Study of 
affect the number of McDonald's outlets the Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and 
opened in a state. Pennsylvania." National Bureau of Eco- 

Finally, we find that prices of fast-food nomic Research (Cambridge, MA) Work- 
meals increased in New Jersey relative to ing Paper No. 4509, October 1993. 
Pennsylvania, suggesting that much of the Katz, Lawrence F. and Krueger, Alan B. "The 
burden of the minimum-wage rise was Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast 
passed on to consumers. Within New Jer- Food Industry." Industrial and Labor Re- 
sey, however, we find no evidence that prices lations Reuiew, October 1992, 46(1), pp. 
increased more in stores that were most 6-21. 



VOL. 84 NO. 4 CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT 793 

Lester, Richard A. "Employment Effects of Management Science Discussion Paper 
Minimum Wages." Industrial and Labor No. 811, Northwestern University, March 
Relations Reuiew, January 1960, 13, pp. 1988. 
254-64. Ransom, Michael R. "Seniority and Monop- 

. The economics of labor, 2nd Ed. sony in the Academic Labor Market." 
New York: Macmillan, 1964. American Economic Reuiew, March 1993, 

Machin, Stephen and Manning, Alan. "The 83(1), pp. 221-33. 
Effects of Minimum Wages on Wage Dis- Stigler, George J. "The Economics of Mini- 
persion and Employment: Evidence from mum Wage Legislation." American Eco- 
the U.K. Wage Councils." Industrial and nomic Reciew, June 1946, 36(3), pp. 
Labor Relations Reuiew, January 1994, 358-65. 
47(2), pp. 319-29. Sullivan, Daniel G. "Monopsony Power in the 

McDonald's Corporation. 1991 Annual report. Market for Nurses." Journal of Law and 
Chicago, 1991. Economics, October 1989, Part 2, 32(2), 

Mincer, Jacob and Leighton, Linda. "The Ef- pp. S135-78. 
fects of Minimum Wages on Human Cap- U.S. Department of Commerce. 	1987 Census of 
ital Formation," in Simon Rottenberg, retail trade: Miscellaneous subjects. Wash- 
ed., The economics of legal minimum ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
wages. Washington, DC: American Enter- Office, October 1990. 
prise Institute, 1981, pp. 155-73. Wellington, 	 Alison J. "Effects of the Mini- 

Mortensen, Dale T. "Equilibrium Wage Dis- mum Wage on the Employment Status of 
tributions: A Synthesis." Center for Youths: An Update." Journal of Human 
Mathematical Studies in Economics and Resources, Winter 1991, 26(1), pp. 27-46. 



http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 4 -

You have printed the following article:

Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey
and Pennsylvania
David Card; Alan B. Krueger
The American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4. (Sep., 1994), pp. 772-793.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199409%2984%3A4%3C772%3AMWAEAC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O

This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.

[Footnotes]

1 The Effect of The Minimum Wage on Employment and Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2. (Jun., 1982), pp. 487-528.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0515%28198206%2920%3A2%3C487%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C

1 Time-Series Evidence of the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and
Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Winter, 1983), pp. 3-31.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28198324%2918%3A1%3C3%3ATEOTEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

1 Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of Youths: An Update
Alison J. Wellington
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Winter, 1991), pp. 27-46.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28199124%2926%3A1%3C27%3AEOTMWO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.



http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 4 -

3 The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S

11 The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S

19 The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S

26 The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S

32 Monopsony Power in the Market for Nurses
Daniel Sullivan
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, Part 2, Empirical Approaches to Market Power: A
Conference Sponsored by the University of Illinois and the Federal Trade Commission. (Oct., 1989),
pp. S135-S178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28198910%2932%3A2%3CS135%3AMPITMF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1

32 Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor Market
Michael R. Ransom
The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 1. (Mar., 1993), pp. 221-233.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199303%2983%3A1%3C221%3ASAMITA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.



http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 4 -

References

The Effect of The Minimum Wage on Employment and Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2. (Jun., 1982), pp. 487-528.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0515%28198206%2920%3A2%3C487%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C

Time-Series Evidence of the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and
Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Winter, 1983), pp. 3-31.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28198324%2918%3A1%3C3%3ATEOTEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum Wage
David Card
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 22-37.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C22%3AURVIWT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3

Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California, 1987-89
David Card
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 38-54.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C38%3ADMWREA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.



http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 4 -

Employment Effects of Minimum Wages
Richard A. Lester
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 13, No. 2. (Jan., 1960), pp. 254-264.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28196001%2913%3A2%3C254%3AEEOMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3

The Effects of Minimum Wages on Wage Dispersion and Employment: Evidence from the
U.K. Wages Councils
Stephen Machin; Alan Manning
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2. (Jan., 1994), pp. 319-329.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199401%2947%3A2%3C319%3ATEOMWO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7

Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor Market
Michael R. Ransom
The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 1. (Mar., 1993), pp. 221-233.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199303%2983%3A1%3C221%3ASAMITA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J

The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation
George J. Stigler
The American Economic Review, Vol. 36, No. 3. (Jun., 1946), pp. 358-365.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28194606%2936%3A3%3C358%3ATEOMWL%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A

Monopsony Power in the Market for Nurses
Daniel Sullivan
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, Part 2, Empirical Approaches to Market Power: A
Conference Sponsored by the University of Illinois and the Federal Trade Commission. (Oct., 1989),
pp. S135-S178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28198910%2932%3A2%3CS135%3AMPITMF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1

Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of Youths: An Update
Alison J. Wellington
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Winter, 1991), pp. 27-46.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28199124%2926%3A1%3C27%3AEOTMWO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.