Family Firms

•  Family rms prevalent around the world (Shleifer et al.)
      Berle and Means (1932)

•  Two aspects:
      (Founder, heir) management
      Family ownership

•  Main question: Are heirs better or worse managers?
      implicit contract, long termism (renegotiate longterm implicit con-
       tracts as soon as outside management take over), reputation
      Carnegie conjecture: give your heir not too few, not too much

•  Important Implications for taxtion (estate taxation, capital taxation, etc.)
•  Large share of big companies with family majority ownership (more so in
   Civil Laws 50%, than in Common Laws 37%)

•  Anderson and Reeb (JF, 2003):
      10% family ownership denes family rm (20% typical sucient for
       control), which gets 30% of S&P 500 US rms.
      within those, 15% founder CEO, 30% descendant CEO, 55% profes-
       sional CEO.
      look at performance of (young/old) family rms, eect of CEO hire,
       etc.

•  France: employment half and half. within family rms, employment half
   and half (between family management and pro management)

      Just looking at the cross-section, family rms managed by heirs have
       higher performance. But these are the rms that we exactly expect
       to perform the worst...

•  Something obvious missing from the regressions. What is it?
•  Endogenous decision for family founders to cash out (widely held rms
   mostly were once family rms). Which way is the bias?

      Cash out when anticipate bad things in future. Fool the buyers.
      Cash out when anticipate good things in future. Best time to avoid
       lemon's problem.

•  Want IV to control for this endogeneity.

                                 1
•  Perez-Gonzales (AER, 2005):

      Look at transitions in management: start with all rms in 1994 (year
       in which Edgar database started), look at family rms that are likely
       to have transistions and use news search to identify actual transi-
       tions. 335 rms. 122 within family successions and 213 unrelated
       successions.
      Cumulative Abnormal Return of Succession Announcements is posi-
       tive for unrelated successions and negative for family heirs.
      Evidence opposite to Anderson and Reeb - what could be happening?
      Inconsistency a problem.

•  What is an instrument?

      ROAit  = αt + βF amilyHeiri · P ostt + εit.
      But worry about endogeneity
      Three possible sources of endogeineity
         ∗ Omitted variable: wage: ability of individuals is a key factor of
           wage but usually not measured
           Error in variables:    ∗   . Using  instead of ∗ introduced
         ∗                  xk = xk+e        xk          xk
           a correlation between xk and the perturbation. (attenuation
           bias)
         ∗ Simultaneity: shock on demand is transmitted to price.
      Instrument: exogenous to error term (exclusion restriction - some-
       thing that you cannot test - must use economic reasoning/ or over-
       identifying test when you have more IVs than needed), correlated to

       xk conditional on other exogenous variables.
         ∗ related to transitions but exogenous to rm return.
      Weak instrument problem: will be rejecting the null too often. Rule
       of thumb in rst stage: one IV, t-stat>3.3; multiple IVs, F>10.

•  A Really Bad Instrument:

      Anderson and Reeb (2004)
      Size, Square of Size, and Return Volatiliy
      Does this aect rm return only through whether a rm is a family
       rm?
      Fails exclusion restriction, big time.

•  IV: Sex of rst child of departing CEO, z

      Benedsen et al (2007)

                                 2
      Danish economists working on Danish data.
      Can match rms with CEO (social security data)
      Is this a good instrument?
      randomization test: compare, before transition, the observable char-
       acteristics for rms with z = 1 and z = 0. IV → those should be
       similar.
      Not a proof of exclusion restriction (because u is not observed), but
       pretty good already.
      Number of male children or Ratio of male children are not good IVs
       because they might be correlated to the founder's dynastic concerns.
      Ways to do IV:

         ∗ GMM:   E[ziui] = 0
         ∗ TSLS: rst stage/second stage
         ∗ Reduced form: regress outcome y directly on the instrument z
         ∗ Should report naive OLS too
      Finds greater negative eect of family heir (possible OLS bias because
       worse rms resorts to professional management)
         ∗ ways IV nding larger eects:
             · true eect as decribed above
             · measurement error in OLS? IV might not subject to attenu-
               ation bias
             · weak instrument
•  Breaking Down Dierences in ROA
      ROA  = (L/A)  × (Y/L − w).
      ∆ROA   =unconditional dierence in productivity - unconditional dif-
       ference in wage + unconditional dierence in capital intensity + dif-
       ference in covariance
      French data has precise wage records.
      Founder CEO: higher labor productivity (long run implicit contract:
       not going to re when things goes sour, but short term pay is lower
       - needs reputation - founder CEO)
      Heir CEO & Professional CEO: lower wages
      Implicit contract assumption: Founder CEO rms should have less
       ring response to industry-wide demand shocks. French data nds
       that heir rms reacts the least instead.

•  ROAit = α+βF amit  +εit. Not identied because within 1800 rms, only
   21 transitions.
         j                                  j . This is identied (think
•  ∆Empit  =  α + βF ami × ∆ log(salesjt) + uit
   about why).

                                 3