    Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 15, Number 4—Fall 2001—Pages 69–85


Instrumental Variables and the Search
for Identiﬁcation: From Supply and
Demand to Natural Experiments

Joshua D. Angrist and Alan B. Krueger


        he method of instrumental variables is a signature technique in the
        econometrics toolkit. The canonical example, and earliest applications, of
        instrumental variables involved attempts to estimate demand and supply
T1
curves. Economists such as P.G. Wright, Henry Schultz, Elmer Working and
Ragnar Frisch were interested in estimating the elasticities of demand and supply
for products ranging from herring to butter, usually with time series data. If the
demand and supply curves shift over time, the observed data on quantities and
prices reﬂect a set of equilibrium points on both curves. Consequently, an ordinary
least squares regression of quantities on prices fails to identify—that is, trace
out—either the supply or demand relationship.
    P.G. Wright (1928) confronted this issue in the seminal application of instru-
mental variables: estimating the elasticities of supply and demand for ﬂaxseed, the
source of linseed oil.2 Wright noted the difﬁculty of obtaining estimates of the
elasticities of supply and demand from the relationship between price and quantity


1 See Goldberger (1972) and Morgan (1990) for a discussion of the origins of instrumental variables and
related methods. Bowden and Turkington (1984) provide a more technical discussion of instrumental
variables. The term “instrumental variables” originated with Olav Reiersøl (1945); Morgan cites an
interview in which Riersøl attributed the term to his teacher, Ragnar Frisch.
2 In the early 1920s, Wright’s son, Sewall Wright, developed “causal path analysis,” a method-of-
moments-type technique for estimating recursive structural models and simultaneous equations. P.G.
Wright showed that path analysis and instrumental variables were equivalent in his simultaneous
equations application. It is quite likely that Sewall Wright deserves much of the credit for his father’s use
of instrumental variables.

y Joshua D. Angrist is Professor of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. Alan B. Krueger is Bendheim Professor of Economics and Public
Policy, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
70  Journal of Economic Perspectives


alone. He suggested (p. 312), however, that certain “curve shifters”—what we would
now call instrumental variables—can be used to address the problem: “Such
additional factors may be factors which (A) affect demand conditions without
affecting cost conditions or which (B) affect cost conditions without affecting
demand conditions.” A variable he used for the demand curve shifter was the price
of substitute goods, such as cottonseed, while a variable he used for the supply curve
shifter was yield per acre, which can be thought of as primarily determined by the
weather.
    Speciﬁcally, an instrumental variables estimate of the demand elasticity can be
constructed by dividing the sample covariance between the log quantity of ﬂaxseed
and the yield per acre by the sample covariance between the log price of ﬂaxseed
and the yield per acre. This estimate is consistent as long as yield per acre is
uncorrelated with the error in the demand equation and correlated with price.
Replacing yield per acre with the price of substitutes in this calculation generates
an instrumental variables estimate of the supply elasticity. Intuitively, weather-
related shifts in yield are used to trace out the demand curve, while changes in the
price of substitutes are used to shift the demand curve so as to trace out the supply
curve.
    Wright (1928, p. 314) observed: “Success with this method depends on success
in discovering factors of the type A and B.” He used six different supply shifters to
estimate the demand curve and then averaged the six instrumental variables
estimates. The resulting average elasticity of demand for ﬂaxseed was Ϫ0.80. His
average instrumental variables estimate of the elasticity of supply was 2.4. Wright’s
econometric advance went unnoticed by the subsequent literature. Not until the
1940s were instrumental variables and related methods rediscovered and extended.
    Wright’s (1928) method of averaging the different instrumental variables
estimates does not necessarily produce the most efﬁcient estimate; other estimators
may combine the information in different instruments to produce an estimate with
less sampling variability. The most efﬁcient way to combine multiple instruments is
usually two-stage least squares, originally developed by Theil (1953).3 In the ﬁrst
stage, the “endogenous” right-hand side variable (price, in this application) is
regressed on all the instruments. In the second stage, the predicted values of price,
based on the data for the instruments and the coefﬁcients estimated from the
ﬁrst-stage regression, are then either plugged directly into the equation of interest
in place of the endogenous regressor or, equivalently, used as an instrument for the
endogenous regressor. In this way, two-stage least squares takes the information in
a set of instruments and neatly boils it down to a single instrument.4


3 The relative efﬁciency of two-stage least squares turns on a number of auxiliary assumptions, such as
homoskedastic errors. See Wooldridge’s paper in this issue for a discussion of alternative generalized
method of moments estimators.
4 Typically, a number of “exogenous” conditioning variables also appear in both the supply and demand
equations. These exogenous covariates do not play the role of instruments, but nevertheless should be
included in both the ﬁrst- and second-stage regressions. Two-stage least squares can also be used if there
                                     Joshua D. Angrist and Alan B. Krueger 71


Instrumental Variables and Measurement Error

    Instrumental variables methods were also pioneered to overcome measure-
ment error problems in explanatory variables.5 Measurement error can arise for
many reasons, including the limited ability of statistical agencies to collect accurate
information and the deviation between the variables speciﬁed in economic theory
and those collected in practice. If an explanatory variable is measured with additive
random  errors, then the coefﬁcient on that variable in a bivariate ordinary least
squares regression will be biased toward zero in a large sample. The higher the
proportion of variability that is due to errors, the greater the bias. Given an
instrument that is uncorrelated with the measurement error and the equation error
(that is, the equation error from the model with the correctly measured data), but
correlated with the correctly measured variable, instrumental variables provide a
consistent estimate even in the presence of measurement error.
    Friedman’s (1957) celebrated analysis of the consumption function can be
interpreted as an application of instrumental variables in this context. Annual
income is a noisy measure of permanent income, so a regression of consumption
on annual income yields too small an estimate of the marginal propensity to
consume from permanent income. To overcome this measurement problem, Fried-
man grouped his data by city, which is equivalent to using a two-stage least squares
procedure. The ﬁrst stage is implicitly a regression of annual income on a set of
dummies indicating each of the cities. The ﬁtted values from this regression would
be average income by city, so that regressing micro consumption data on ﬁtted
income values, as is done in two-stage least squares, is the same as a weighted
regression using city average data, where the weights are the number of observa-
tions per city.
    While two-stage least squares and other instrumental variables estimators are
consistent, they are not unbiased. Instrumental variables estimates are not unbiased
because they involve a ratio of random quantities, for which expectations need not
exist nor have a simple form. In contrast, expectations of ordinary least squares
estimates typically exist and are easily calculated. Textbooks sometimes gloss over
the distinction between unbiasedness and consistency, but the difference can
matter in practice. Unbiasedness means the estimator has a sampling distribution
centered on the parameter of interest in a sample of any size, while consistency only
means that the estimator converges to the population parameter as the sample size
grows. Since instrumental variables estimates are consistent, but not unbiased,
researchers using instrumental variables should aspire to work with large samples.


is more than one endogenous regressor in an equation, provided there are at least as many instruments
as endogenous regressors (Bowden and Turkington, 1984).
5 Wald’s (1940) method of ﬁtting straight lines was speciﬁcally developed to overcome errors-in-variables
problems. Durbin (1954) showed that Wald’s method is a special case of instrumental variables. See also
Geary (1949). In this symposium, Hausman provides an overview of measurement error problems.
72  Journal of Economic Perspectives


    The precise form of the asymptotic distribution of an instrumental variables
estimator (that is, the sampling distribution in very large samples) depends on a
number of technical conditions. Most modern software packages include options
for “robust standard errors” that are asymptotically valid under reasonably general
assumptions. It is important to remember, however, that in practice these standard
errors are only approximate.

Instrumental Variables and Omitted Variables

    Although instrumental variables methods are still widely used to estimate
systems of simultaneous equations and to counteract bias from measurement error,
a ﬂowering of recent work uses instrumental variables to overcome omitted vari-
ables problems in estimates of causal relationships. Studies of this type are primarily
concerned with estimating a narrowly deﬁned causal relationship, such as the effect
of schooling, training or military service on earnings; the impact of smoking or
medical treatments on health; the effect of social insurance programs on labor
supply; or the effect of policing on crime. The observed association between the
outcome and explanatory variable of interest in these and many other examples is
likely to be misleading in the sense that it partly reﬂects omitted factors that are
related to both variables. If these factors could be measured and held constant in
a regression, the omitted variables bias would be eliminated. In practice, however,
economic theory typically does not specify all of the variables that should be held
constant while estimating a relationship, and it is difﬁcult to measure all of the
relevant variables accurately even if they are speciﬁed.
    One solution to the omitted variables problem is to assign the variable of
interest randomly. For example, social experiments are sometimes used to assign
people to a job training program or to a control group. Random assignment assures
that participation in the program (among those in the assignment pool) is not
correlated with omitted personal or social factors. Randomized experiments are
not always possible, however. It would not be feasible to force a randomly chosen
group of people to quit smoking or to attend school for an extra year, or to assign
the value of the minimum wage randomly across states. On the other hand, it may
be possible to ﬁnd, or even to create, a degree of exogenous variation in variables
like schooling, smoking and minimum wages. Instrumental variables offer a poten-
tial solution in these situations.
    To see how instrumental variables can solve the omitted variables problem,
suppose that we would like to use the following cross-sectional regression equation
to measure the “rate of return to schooling,” denoted ␳:

                            ϭ ␣ ϩ  ␳  ϩ ␤   ϩ␧
                          Yi        Si   Ai    i .


In this equation, Yi is person i’s log wage, Si is the person’s highest grade of
schooling completed, and Ai is a measure of ability or motivation. (For simplicity,
                                          Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identiﬁcation 73


                  we take Ai to be a single variable, although it could be a vector of variables.)
                  Although the problem of estimating this equation is straightforward in principle,

                  data on Ai are typically unavailable, and researchers are unsure what the right
                  controls for ability or motivation would be in any case.6 Without additional infor-
                  mation, the parameter of interest, ␳, is not identiﬁed; that is, we cannot deduce it
                  from the joint distribution of earnings and schooling alone.

                      Suppose, however, we have a third variable, the instrument, denoted Zi , which
                  is correlated with schooling, but otherwise unrelated to earnings. That is, Zi is
                                                                                 ␧
                  uncorrelated with the omitted variables and the regression error, i. Then an
                  instrumental variables estimate of the payoff to schooling is the sample analog of

                  Cov(Yi , Zi)/Cov(Si , Zi). The instrumental variables methods allow us to estimate
                  the coefﬁcient of interest consistently and free from asymptotic bias from omitted
                  variables, without actually having data on the omitted variables or even knowing
                  what they are. (If there is more than one valid instrument, the coefﬁcient of interest
                  can be estimated by two-stage least squares.) Intuitively, instrumental variables solve
                  the omitted variables problem by using only part of the variability in schooling—
                  speciﬁcally, a part that is uncorrelated with the omitted variables—to estimate the
                  relationship between schooling and earnings.
                      Instruments that are used to overcome omitted variables bias are sometimes
                  said to derive from “natural experiments.”7 Recent years have seen a resurgence in
                  the use of instrumental variables in this way—that is, to exploit situations where the
                  forces of nature or government policy have conspired to produce an environment
                  somewhat akin to a randomized experiment. This type of application has generated
                  some of the most provocative empirical ﬁndings in economics, along with some
                  controversy over substance and methods.
                      A good instrument is correlated with the endogenous regressor for reasons the
                  researcher can verify and explain, but uncorrelated with the outcome variable for
                  reasons beyond its effect on the endogenous regressor. Maddala (1977, p. 154)
                  rightfully asks, “Where do you get such a variable?” Like most econometrics texts,
                  he does not provide an answer. In our view, good instruments often come from
                  detailed knowledge of the economic mechanism and institutions determining the
                  regressor of interest.
                      In the case of schooling, human capital theory suggests that people make
                  schooling choices by comparing the costs and beneﬁts of alternatives. Thus, one
                  possible source of instruments would be differences in costs due, say, to loan
                  policies or other subsidies that vary independently of ability or earnings potential.
                  A second source of variation in educational attainment is institutional constraints.


                  6                                                              ␳ ϩ ␤␥     ␥
                   The expected coefﬁcient on schooling from a regression that omits the Ai variable is , where
                  is the regression coefﬁcient from a hypothetical regression of Ai on schooling. It should be apparent that
                  if the omitted variable is uncorrelated with schooling, or uncorrelated with earnings conditional on
                                                                    ␳
                  schooling, the coefﬁcient on schooling is an unbiased estimate of even if Ai is omitted from the
                  equation.
                  7 A natural experiment can be studied without application of instrumental variables methods; in this
                  case, reduced form estimates would be presented.
74  Journal of Economic Perspectives


Angrist and Krueger (1991) exploit this kind of variation in a paper that typiﬁes the
use of “natural experiments” to try to eliminate omitted variables bias.
    The rationale for the Angrist and Krueger (1991) approach is that because
most states required students to enter school in the calendar year in which they
turned six, school start age is a function of date of birth. Those born late in the year
are young for their grade. In states with a December 31st birthday cutoff, children
born in the fourth quarter enter school at age 5 3⁄4 , while those born in the ﬁrst
quarter enter school at age 6 3⁄4. Furthermore, because compulsory schooling laws
typically require students to remain in school until their 16th birthdays, these
groups of students will be in different grades when they reach the legal dropout
age. In essence, the combination of school start age policies and compulsory
schooling laws creates a natural experiment in which children are compelled to
attend school for different lengths of time depending on their birthdays.
    Using data from  the 1980 census, we looked at the relationship between
educational attainment and quarter of birth for men born from 1930 to 1959. The
overall pattern is that younger birth cohorts ﬁnished more schooling. Figure 1
displays the relationship between education and quarter of birth for men born in
the 1930s. The ﬁgure clearly shows that men born early in the calendar year tend
to have lower average schooling levels. We selected this ten-year birth cohort
because men this age tend to have a relatively ﬂat age-earnings proﬁle. But the
pattern of less education for men born early in the year holds for men born in the
1940s and 1950s, as well. Because an individual’s date of birth is probably unrelated
to the person’s innate ability, motivation or family connections (ruling out astro-
logical effects), date of birth should provide a valid instrument for schooling.
    Figure 2 displays average earnings by quarter of birth for the same sample. In
essence, this ﬁgure shows the “reduced form” relationship between the instruments
and the dependent variable. Older cohorts tend to have higher earnings, because
earnings rise with work experience. But the ﬁgure also shows that, on average, men
born in early quarters of the year almost always earn less than those born later in
the year. Importantly, this reduced form relationship parallels the quarter-of-birth
pattern in schooling. An examination of the reduced-form and ﬁrst-stage estimates,
either in graphical or tabular form, often provides insights concerning the causal
story motivating a particular set of instrumental variable estimates. In this case, it is
clear that the differences in education and earnings associated with quarter of birth
are discrete blips, rather than smooth changes related to the gradual effects of
aging.
    The intuition behind instrumental variables in this case is that differences in
earnings by quarter of birth are assumed to be accounted for solely by differences
in schooling by quarter of birth, so that the estimated return to schooling is simply
the appropriately rescaled difference in average earnings by quarter of birth. Only
a small part of the variability in schooling—the part associated with quarter of
birth—is used to identify the return to education. In our formal statistical estimates,
we found that men born in the ﬁrst quarter have about one-tenth of a year less
schooling than men born in later quarters and that men born in the ﬁrst quarter
                                     Joshua D. Angrist and Alan B. Krueger 75


Figure 1
Mean Years of Completed Education, by Quarter of Birth


Source: Authors’ calculations from the 1980 Census.

Figure 2
Mean Log Weekly Earnings, by Quarter of Birth


Source: Authors’ calculations from the 1980 Census.

earn about 0.1 percent less than men born in later quarters. The ratio of the
difference in earnings to the difference in schooling, about 0.10, is an instrumental
variables estimate of the proportional earnings gain from an additional year of
schooling.
76  Journal of Economic Perspectives


    As it turns out, this estimate of the change in earnings due to additional
education differs little from a simple ordinary least squares regression of education
on earnings in our data. This ﬁnding suggests that there is little bias from omitted
ability variables in the ordinary least squares estimate of the effect of education on
earnings, probably because omitted variables in the earnings equation are weakly
correlated or uncorrelated with education. In other applications, the instrumental
variables estimates and ordinary least squares estimates are quite different. For
example, Angrist and Lavy (1999) estimate the effect of class size on student
achievement using instruments constructed from Maimonides’ rule, a bureaucratic
ceiling on class size that induces sharp differences in average class size in Israeli
schools. Ordinary least squares estimates in this case show either no effect or a
beneﬁcial effect of larger classes, while the corresponding instrumental variable
estimates reveal a statistically signiﬁcant and sizeable beneﬁcial effect of smaller
classes.
    A common criticism  of the natural experiments approach to instrumental
variables is that it does not spell out fully the underlying theoretical relationships
(for example, Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 2000). In the Angrist and Krueger (1991)
application, for example, the theoretical relationship between education and earn-
ings is not developed from an elaborate theoretical model; instead, it depends on
the institutional details of the education system. Nevertheless, interest in the causal
effect of education on earnings is easy to motivate. Moreover, the natural experi-
ments approach to instrumental variables is fundamentally grounded in theory, in
the sense that there is usually a well-developed story or model motivating the choice
of instruments. These stories have implications that can be used to support or
refute a behavioral interpretation of the resulting instrumental variables estimates.
    For example, the interpretation of the patterns in Figures 1 and 2 as resulting
from the interaction of school start-age policy and compulsory schooling is sup-
ported by our ﬁnding that quarter of birth is unrelated to earnings and educational
attainment for those with a college degree or higher. This group is unconstrained
by compulsory schooling laws, so if quarter of birth was related to education or
earnings in this sample, the rationale motivating the use of quarter of birth as an
instrument would have been refuted. The ﬁnding that the identiﬁcation strategy
was not refuted by this test suggests that factors other than compulsory schooling
are not responsible for the correlation between education and the instrument in
the full sample.
    The rich implications and potential refutability of instrumental variables anal-
yses based on natural experiments are an important part of what makes the
approach attractive. We would argue that this approach contrasts favorably with
studies that provide detailed but abstract theoretical models, followed by identiﬁ-
cation based on implausible and unexamined choices about which variables to
exclude from the model and assumptions about what statistical distribution certain
variables follow. Indeed, one of the most mechanical and naı¨ve, yet common,
approaches to the choice of instruments uses atheoretical and hard-to-assess as-
sumptions about dynamic relationships to construct instruments from lagged vari-
                        Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identiﬁcation 77


ables in time series or panel data. The use of lagged endogenous variables as
instruments is problematic if the equation error or omitted variables are serially
correlated. In this regard, Wright’s (1928) use of the more plausible exogenous
instrument “yield per acre” seems well ahead of its time.

Interpreting Estimates with Heterogeneous Responses

    One difﬁculty in interpreting instrumental variables estimates is that not every
observation’s behavior is affected by the instrument. As we have stressed, instru-
mental variables methods can be thought of as operating by using only part of the
variation in an explanatory variable—that is, by changing the behavior of only some
people. For example, in the Angrist and Krueger (1991) study just discussed, the
quarter-of-birth instrument is most relevant for those who are at high probability of
quitting school as soon as possible, with little or no effect on those who are likely
to proceed on to college.
    Another example that makes this point is Angrist’s (1990) use of Vietnam-era
draft lottery numbers as an instrument to estimate the effect of military service on
earnings later in life. The draft lottery numbers randomly assigned to young men
in the early 1970s were highly correlated with the probability of being drafted into
the military, but not correlated with other factors that might change earnings later.
The military draft presumably affected the behavior of those who would not have
joined the military otherwise. But most of those who served in Vietnam were true
volunteers who would have served regardless of their draft lottery number. An
estimate using draft lottery numbers as instruments is therefore based on the
experience of draftees only. This may not capture the effects of military service on
the civilian earnings of volunteers.
    In other words, instrumental variables provide an estimate for a speciﬁc
group—namely, people whose behavior can be manipulated by the instrument.
The quarter-of-birth instruments used by Angrist and Krueger (1991) generate an
estimate for those whose level of schooling was changed by that instrument.
Similarly, the draft lottery instrument provides estimates of a well-deﬁned causal
effect for a subset of the treated group: men whose behavior was changed by the
draft lottery “experiment.”
    This issue arises in many studies using instrumental variables, and it is dis-
cussed formally in papers by Imbens and Angrist (1994) and related work. They
show that with a dummy endogenous variable, instrumental variables methods
estimate causal effects for those whose behavior would be changed by the instru-
ment if it were assigned in a randomized trial. That is, the effect is estimated for
subjects who will take the treatment if assigned to the treatment group, but
otherwise not take the treatment. This parameter is known as the Local Average
Treatment Effect, or LATE, for short. In some cases, the experiences of the group
of “compliers” captured by LATE are representative of those of the entire treated
group. If everyone in the population has the same response to a particular inter-
78  Journal of Economic Perspectives


vention or treatment, as is commonly assumed, the distinction between LATE and
other parameters does not matter. But with “heterogeneous treatment effects,” the
parameter identiﬁed by instrumental variables may differ from the average effect of
interest.8
    It should be noted that this speciﬁcity of estimates is endemic to empirical
research. All statistical methods, from the simplest regressions to the most complex
structural models, have elements of this limitation when used to analyze phenom-
ena with heterogeneous responses. Nevertheless, many interventions and relation-
ships can be fruitfully studied using estimated effects for speciﬁc subsamples,
provided the possible limitations to generalizing the results are understood and
explored. Indeed, this lack of immediate generality is probably the norm in medical
research based on clinical trials, yet much progress has been made in that ﬁeld.
    Our view is that instrumental variables methods often solve the ﬁrst-order
problem of eliminating omitted variables bias for a well-deﬁned population. Since
the sample size and range of variability in many empirical studies are quite limited,
extrapolation to other populations is naturally somewhat speculative and often
relies heavily on theory and common sense. (A fertilizer that helps corn to grow in
Iowa will probably have a beneﬁcial effect in California as well, though one can’t be
sure.) Moreover, the existence of heterogeneous treatment effects would be a
reason for analyzing more natural experiments, not fewer, to understand the
source and extent of heterogeneity in the effect of interest.
    It is also worth emphasizing that the population one learns about in a natural
experiment is often of intrinsic interest. For example, the Angrist and Krueger
(1991) instrumental variables estimates, which are identiﬁed by differences in
schooling for people affected by compulsory schooling laws, are relevant for
assessing the economic rewards to increases in schooling induced by legal and
institutional changes from policies designed to keep children from dropping out of
high school. In the case of the draft lottery, even if the instrumental variables
estimates do not necessarily tell us about the effect of military experience on
earnings for both volunteers and draftees, knowing the effect of being drafted on
later civilian earnings is important. Moreover, the story behind the instrumental
variables analysis often opens up other avenues of inquiry. For example, Angrist
(1990) interpreted the civilian earnings penalty associated with Vietnam-era service
as due to a loss of labor market experience. If true, the resulting estimates have
predictive validity for the consequences of compulsory military service in other
times and places.


8 The theoretical result that instrumental variables methods identify LATE requires a technical assump-
tion known as “monotonicity.” This assumption means that the instrument only moves the endogenous
regressor in one direction. With draft lottery instruments, for example, monotonicity implies that being
draft-eligible makes a person at least as likely to serve in the military as he would be if he were
draft-exempt. This seems reasonable, and is automatically satisﬁed by traditional latent index models for
endogenous treatments.
                                     Joshua D. Angrist and Alan B. Krueger 79


Potential Pitfalls

    What can go wrong with instrumental variables? The most important potential
problem is a bad instrument, that is, an instrument that is correlated with the
omitted variables (or the error term in the structural equation of interest in the
case of simultaneous equations). Especially worrisome is the possibility that an
association between the instrumental variable and omitted variables can lead to a
bias in the resulting estimates that is much greater than the bias in ordinary least
squares estimates. Moreover, seemingly appropriate instruments can turn out to be
correlated with omitted variables on closer examination. For example, the weather
in Brazil probably shifts the supply curve for coffee, providing a plausible instru-
ment to estimate the effect of price on quantity demanded. But weather in Brazil
might also shift the demand for coffee if sophisticated commercial buyers at the
New York Coffee, Sugar and Coca Exchange, where coffee futures are traded, use
weather data to adjust holdings in anticipation of price increases that may not
materialize in fact.
    Another concern is the possibility of bias when instruments are only weakly
correlated with the endogenous regressor(s). This possibility was ﬁrst noted by
Nagar (1959) and emphasized by Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995). In fact, instru-
mental variables estimates with very weak instruments tend to be centered on the
corresponding ordinary least squares estimate (Sawa, 1969).
    Several solutions to the weak instruments problem have been proposed. First,
the bias of two-stage least squares is proportional to the degree of overidentiﬁca-
tion. In other words, if K instruments are used to estimate the effect of G endog-
enous variables, the bias is proportional to K Ϫ G. Using fewer instruments
therefore reduces bias. In fact, if the number of instruments is equal to the number
of endogenous variables, the bias is approximately zero. A variety of technical ﬁxes
and diagnostic tests have also been proposed for the weak instrument problem.9
    Concerns about weak instruments can be mitigated most simply by looking at
the reduced form equation, that is, the ordinary least squares regression of the
dependent variable of interest on the instruments and exogenous variables. These
estimates are unbiased, even if the instruments are weak. Because the reduced form
effects are proportional to the coefﬁcient of interest, one can determine the sign of
the coefﬁcient of interest and guestimate its magnitude by rescaling the reduced


9 One solution is to use the Limited Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML) estimator. Although
LIML and two-stage least squares have the same asymptotic distribution and are algebraically equivalent
in just-identiﬁed models, in overidentiﬁed models their ﬁnite-sample distributions can be very different.
Most importantly, LIML is approximately unbiased in the sense that the median of its sampling
distribution is generally close to the population parameter being estimated (Anderson et al., 1982).
Alternatives to LIML include the approximately unbiased split-sample and jackknife instrumental
variables estimators (Angrist and Krueger, 1995; Angrist, Imbens, and Krueger, 1999; Blomquist and
Dahlberg, 1999), bias-corrected estimation (Sawa, 1973; Bekker, 1994), inference procedures discussed
by Staiger and Stock (1997) and Hahn and Hausman (1999), and Bayesian smoothing of the ﬁrst stage
(Chamberlain and Imbens, 1996).
80  Journal of Economic Perspectives


form using plausible assumptions about the size of the ﬁrst-stage coefﬁcient(s).
Most importantly, if the reduced form estimates are not signiﬁcantly different from
zero, the presumption should be that the effect of interest is either absent or the
instruments are too weak to detect it. The plausibility of the magnitude of the
reduced form effects should also be considered.
    We conclude our review of pitfalls with a discussion of functional form issues
for both the ﬁrst and second stages in two-stage least squares estimation. Researchers
are sometimes tempted to use probit or logit to generate ﬁrst-stage predicted values
in applications with a dummy endogenous regressor. But this is not necessary and
may even do some harm. In two-stage least squares, consistency of the second-stage
estimates does not turn on getting the ﬁrst-stage functional form right (Kelejian,
1971). So using a linear regression for the ﬁrst-stage estimates generates consistent
second-stage estimates even with a dummy endogenous variable. Moreover, using a
nonlinear ﬁrst stage to generate ﬁtted values that are plugged directly into the
second-stage equation does not generate consistent estimates unless the nonlinear
model happens to be exactly right, a result which makes the dangers of misspeciﬁ-
cation high.10
    Nonlinear second-stage estimates with continuous or multivalued regressors
are similarly tricky, requiring a correctly speciﬁed functional form in order to
interpret the estimates easily. Even if the underlying second-stage relationship is
nonlinear, linear instrumental variables estimates such as two-stage least squares
typically capture an average effect of economic interest analogous to the LATE
parameter for dummy endogenous regressors (Angrist and Imbens, 1995; Card,
1995; Heckman and Vytlacil, 1998). Thus, two-stage least squares is a robust
estimation method that provides a natural starting point for instrumental variables
applications. The importance of functional form issues can be assessed in a more
detailed secondary analysis by experimenting with alternative instruments and
examining suitable graphs.

Nature’s Stream of Experiments

    Trygve Haavelmo (1944, p. 14) drew an analogy between two sorts of experi-
ments: “those we should like to make” and “the stream of experiments that nature
is steadily turning out from her own enormous laboratory, and which we merely
watch as passive observers.” He also lamented, “[U]nfortunately—most economists
do not describe their designs of experiments explicitly.” The deﬁning characteristic


10 To be more speciﬁc, researchers risk speciﬁcation error if they plug in ﬁtted values from a logit,
probit, or other nonlinear equations directly in the second step of a two-stage least squares procedure.
Fitted values from a nonlinear model may still be used as an instrument for an endogenous dummy
variable, provided a linear model is used to generate ﬁrst-stage predictions of the endogenous dummy
variable from these nonlinear ﬁtted values and all other exogenous covariates in the second-stage
equation.
                        Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identiﬁcation 81


of many recent applications of instrumental variables to the omitted variables
problem is the attention devoted to describing and to assessing the underlying
quasi-experimental design. This can be seen as an explicit attempt to use observa-
tional data to mimic randomized experiments as closely as possible.
    Some economists are pessimistic about the prospects of ﬁnding a substantial
number of useful natural experiments. Michael Hurd (1990), for example, called
the search for natural experiments to test the effect of Social Security on labor
supply “overly cautious” and warned, “if applied to other areas of empirical work
[this method] would effectively stop estimation.” We make no claim that natural
experiments are the only way to obtain useful results, only that they have the
potential to increase our understanding of important economic relationships
greatly. Table 1 provides a sampling of some recent studies that have used instru-
mental variables techniques to analyze a natural experiment or a researcher-
generated randomized experiment. It is hard to conclude that empirical work has
effectively stopped.
    The ﬁrst panel in Table 1 illustrates the breadth of application of the natural
experiments idea in recent empirical work. Other examples can be found in the
surveys by Meyer (1995) and Rosenzweig and Wolpin (2000). Some of the examples
are more convincing than others. But all are distinguished by a serious attempt to
substantiate the underlying assumptions used to infer causality. There is more
“theory” behind these attempts than in many ostensibly structural models where
the justiﬁcation for including or excluding certain variables is neither explicitly
described nor evaluated.
    The second panel in Table 1 illustrates another important development: the
use of instrumental variables in randomized experiments. Instrumental variables
are useful in experiments when, either because of practical or ethical consider-
ations, there is incomplete compliance in the treatment or control groups. In
randomized evaluations of training programs, for example, some treatment group
members may decline training while some control group members may avail
themselves of training through channels outside the experiment. Similarly, in
medical trials, doctors may be willing randomly to offer, but not to impose,
incentives that change behaviors like smoking or taking a new medication.
    Even in experiments with compliance problems, instrumental variables can be
used to estimate the effect of interventions such as job training or medical treat-
ments. The instrumental variable in such cases is a dummy variable indicating
randomized assignment to the treatment or control group, and the endogenous
right-hand-side variable is an indicator of actual treatment status. In a training
evaluation, for example, the actual treatment status variable would be a dummy
variable that equals one for each treatment and control group member who
participated in training, and it would be zero for all those who did not participate
in training. This approach yields a consistent estimate of the causal effect of the
treatment for the population that complies with their random assignment—that is,
the population of “compliers” (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). As in natural experi-
ments, the instrument is used to exploit an exogenous source of variation—created
82     Journal of Economic Perspectives


Table 1
Examples of Studies That Use Instrumental Variables to Analyze Data From
Natural and Randomized Experiments

                                                 Source of Instrumental
Outcome Variable       Endogenous Variable            Variable(s)                   Reference

                                        1. Natural Experiments

Labor supply          Disability insurance  Region and time variation in   Gruber (2000)
                        replacement rates     beneﬁt rules
Labor supply          Fertility             Sibling-Sex composition        Angrist and Evans (1998)
Education, Labor      Out-of-wedlock        Occurrence of twin births      Bronars and Grogger
   supply               fertility                                            (1994)
Wages                 Unemployment          State laws                     Anderson and Meyer
                        insurance tax rate                                   (2000)
Earnings              Years of schooling    Region and time variation in   Duﬂo (2001)
                                              school construction
Earnings              Years of schooling    Proximity to college           Card (1995)
Earnings              Years of schooling    Quarter of birth               Angrist and Krueger
                                                                             (1991)
Earnings              Veteran status        Cohort dummies                 Imbens and van der
                                                                             Klaauw (1995)
Earnings              Veteran status        Draft lottery number           Angrist (1990)
Achievement test      Class size            Discontinuities in class size  Angrist and Lavy (1999)
   scores                                     due to maximum class-size
                                              rule
College enrollment    Financial aid         Discontinuities in ﬁnancial    van der Klaauw (1996)
                                              aid formula
Health                Heart attack surgery  Proximity to cardiac care      McClellan, McNeil and
                                              centers                        Newhouse (1994)
Crime                 Police                Electoral cycles               Levitt (1997)
Employment and        Length of prison      Randomly assigned federal      Kling (1999)
   Earnings             sentence              judges
Birth weight          Maternal smoking      State cigarette taxes          Evans and Ringel (1999)

                                      2. Randomized Experiments

Earnings              Participation in job  Random assignment of           Bloom et al. (1997)
                        training program      admission to training
                                              program
Earnings              Participation in Job  Random assignment of           Burghardt et al. (2001)
                        Corps program         admission to training
                                              program
Achievement test      Enrollment in         Randomly selected offer of     Howell et al. (2000)
   scores               private school        school voucher
Achievement test      Class size            Random assignment to a         Krueger (1999)
   scores                                     small or normal-size class
Achievement test      Hours of study        Random mailing of test         Powers and Swinton
   scores                                     preparation materials          (1984)
Birth weight          Maternal smoking      Random assignment of free      Permutt and Hebel
                                              smoker’s counseling            (1989)
                                                  Joshua D. Angrist and Alan B. Krueger           83


by explicit random       assignment in these cases—to estimate the effect of interest.
The use of such researcher-generated instruments is growing and reﬂects the
accelerating convergence of classical experimentation and observational research
methods.
      Our view is that progress in the application of instrumental variables methods
depends mostly on the gritty work of ﬁnding or creating plausible experiments that
can be used to measure important economic relationships—what statistician David
Freedman (1991) has called “shoe-leather” research. Here the challenges are not
primarily technical in the sense of requiring new theorems or estimators. Rather,
progress comes from detailed institutional knowledge and the careful investigation
and quantiﬁcation of the forces at work in a particular setting. Of course, such
endeavors are not really new. They have always been at the heart of good empirical
research.

y  We are grateful to Anders Bjo¨rklund, Brad De Long, David Freedman, Kevin Hallock, Jerry
Hausman, Timothy Taylor and Michael Waldman for helpful comments.


References

   Anderson, Patricia and Bruce Meyer.    2000.       Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
“The Effects of the Unemployment Insurance            nomics. November, 106:4, pp. 979–1014.
Payroll Tax on Wages, Employment, Claims, and           Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1995.
Denials.” Journal of Public Economics. October, 78:   “Split-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates
1-2, pp. 81–106.                                      of the Returns to Schooling.” Journal of Business
   Anderson, T. W., Naoto Kunitomo and Taka-          and Economic Statistics. 13:2, pp. 225–35.
mitsu Sawa.  1982. “Evaluation of the Distribu-         Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1999.
tion Function of the Limited Information Max-         “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics,” in
imum   Likelihood Estimator.” Econometrica. July,     Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume IIIA. Orley
50:4, pp. 1009–027.                                   Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. Amsterdam:
   Angrist, Joshua D.
                      1990. “Lifetime Earnings        North-Holland, pp. 1277–1366.
and the Vietnam    Era Draft Lottery: Evidence
                                                        Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy. 1999. “Us-
from  Social Security Administrative Records.”
                                                      ing Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effects of
American Economic Review. June, 80:3, pp. 313–36.
                                                      Class Size on Scholastic Achievement.” Quarterly
   Angrist, Joshua D. and   William  N. Evans.
                                                      Journal of Economics. May, 114:2, pp. 533–76.
1998. “Children and their Parents’ Labor Sup-
                                                        Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Alan
ply: Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Fam-
ily Size.” American Economic Review. June, 88:3,      B. Krueger. 1999. “Jackknife Instrumental Vari-
pp. 450–77.                                           ables Estimation.” Journal of Applied Econometrics.
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Guido W. Imbens.            14:1, pp. 57–67.
1995. “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of            Bekker, Paul A. 1994. “Alternative Approxima-
Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable        tions to the Distributions of Instrumental Vari-
Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the American Sta-    ables Estimators.” Econometrica. 62:3, pp. 657–81.
tistical Association. 90:430, pp. 431–42.               Blank, Rebecca. 1991. “The Effects of Double-
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1991.      Blind versus Single-Blind Reviewing: Experimen-
“Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect             tal Evidence from the American Economic Re-
84     Journal of Economic Perspectives


view.” American Economic Review. 81:5, pp. 1041–      sumption Function. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
067.                                                  sity Press.
   Blomquist, So¨ren and Matz Dahlberg.   1999.         Geary, Robert C.   1949. “Determination   of
“Small Sample Properties of LIML and Jackknife        Linear Relations Between Systematic Parts of
IV Estimators: Experiments with Weak Instru-          Variables with Errors of Observations, the Vari-
ments.”  Journal of Applied Econometrics. January/    ances of Which are Unknown.”  Econometrica. Jan-
February, 14:1, pp. 69–88.                            uary, 17, pp. 30–58.
   Bloom, Howard S. et al.  1997. “The Beneﬁts          Goldberger, Arthur S. 1972. “Structural Equa-
and Costs of JTPA Title II-A Programs: Key Find-      tion Methods in the Social Sciences.” Economet-
ings from the National Job Training Partnership       rica. November, 40:6, pp. 979–1001.
Act Study.” Journal of Human Resources. Summer,         Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Disability Insurance
32:3, pp. 549–76.                                     Beneﬁts and Labor Supply.”   Journal of Political
   Bound, John, David Jaeger and Regina Baker.        Economy. December, 108:6, pp. 1162–183.
1995. “Problems with Instrumental Variables Es-         Haavelmo, Trygve.  1944. “The Probability Ap-
timation when the Correlation Between the In-         proach in Econometrics.”  Econometrica. July, 12:
struments and    the  Endogenous Explanatory          Supplement, pp. 1–115.
Variable is Weak.” Journal of the American Statisti-    Hahn, Jinyong and Jerry Hausman.    1999. “A
cal Association. 90:430, pp. 443–50.                  New Speciﬁcation Test for the Validity of Instru-
   Bowden, Roger J. and Darrell A. Turkington.        mental Variables.” MIT Working Paper No. 99-
1984.  Instrumental Variables. Cambridge: Cam-        10, May.
bridge University Press.                                Heckman, James and Edward Vytlacil.    1998.
   Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger.  1994.       “Instrumental Variables Methods for the Corre-
“The    Economic    Consequences    of  Unwed         lated Random Coefﬁcient Model: Estimating the
Motherhood: Using Twins as a Natural Experi-          Average Rate of Return to Schooling when the
ment.”  American Economic Review. 84:5, pp. 1141–     Return is Correlated with Schooling.” Journal of
156.                                                  Human Resources. 33:4, pp. 974–87.
   Burghardt, John et al.  2001. Does Job Corps         Howell, W. G. et al. 2000. “Test-Score Effects
Work? Summary of the National Job Corps Study.        of School Vouchers in Dayton, New York, and
Princeton, N.J.: Mathematica Policy Research,         Washington: Evidence from   Randomized Field
Inc.                                                  Trials.” Paper presented at the annual meeting
   Card, David E.   1995. “Earnings, Schooling        of the American Political Science Association,
and Ability Revisited,” in Research in Labor Eco-     Washington, D.C. September.
nomics, Volume 14.  Solomon W. Polachek, ed.            Hurd, Michael D.  1990. “Research on the El-
Greenwich, Conn. and London: JAI Press, pp.           derly: Economic Status, Retirement, and Con-
23–48.                                                sumption and Savings.” Journal of Economic Liter-
   Chamberlain, Gary and Guido W. Imbens.             ature. 28:2, pp. 565–637.
1996. “Hierarchical Bayes Models with Many In-          Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist.
strumental Variables.” Harvard University De-         1994. “Identiﬁcation and Estimation of Local
partment of Economics, Discussion Paper No.           Average Treatment Effects.”  Econometrica. 62:2,
1781, December.                                       pp. 467–75.
   Duﬂo, Esther.  2001. “Schooling and Labor            Imbens, Guido    W. and    Wilbert van   der
Market Consequences of School Construction in         Klaauw. 1995. “Evaluating the Cost of Conscrip-
Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Ex-        tion in the Netherlands.” Journal of Business and
periment.”  American Economic Review. 91:4, pp.       Economic Statistics. April, 13:2, pp. 207–15.
795–813.                                                Kelejian, H. H.    1971. “Two-Stage    Least
   Durbin, J. 1954. “Errors in Variables.” Review of  Squares and Econometric Systems Linear in Pa-
the International Statistical Institute. 22, pp. 23–32. rameters but Nonlinear in the Endogenous Vari-
   Evans, William N. and Jeanne Ringel.   1999.       ables.” Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
“Can Higher Cigarette Taxes Improve Birth Out-        tion. 66, pp. 373–74.
comes?”  Journal of Public Economics. April, 72:1,      Kling, Jeffrey R. 1999. “The Effect of Prison
pp. 135–54.                                           Sentence Length on the Subsequent Employ-
   Freedman, David.   1991. “Statistical Models       ment and Earnings of Criminal Defendants.”
and Shoe Leather,” in    Sociological Methodology     Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson School,
1991. Peter Marsden, ed. Washington, D.C.:            Discussion Paper 208.
American Sociological Association, chapter 10.          Krueger, Alan B.   1999. “Experimental Esti-
   Friedman, Milton.  1957. A Theory of the Con-      mates of Education     Production  Functions.”
                                 Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identiﬁcation          85


Quarterly Journal of Economics. May, 114:2, pp.         Reiersøl, Olav. 1941. “Conﬂuence Analysis by
497–532.                                              Means of Lag Moments and Other Methods of
   Levitt, Steven D. 1997. “Using Electoral Cycles    Conﬂuence Analysis.”  Econometrica. January, 9,
in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police     pp. 1–24.
on Crime.”  American Economic Review. June, 87:3,       Reiersøl, Olav. 1945. “Conﬂuence Analysis by
pp. 270–90.                                           Means of Instrumental Sets of Variables.” Arkiv
   Maddala, G. S. 1977. Econometrics. New York:       fo¨r Matematik, Astronomi och Fysik. 32a:4, pp.
McGraw-Hill.                                          1–119.
   McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil and Jo-           Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin.
seph P. Newhouse.    1994. “Does More Inten-          2000. “Natural ‘Natural Experiments’ in Eco-
sive Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction         nomics.” Journal of Economic Literature. Decem-
in the Elderly Reduce Mortality?”  Journal of the     ber, 38:4, pp. 827–74.
American Medical Association. September, 272:           Sawa, Takamitsu.    1969. “The Exact Sam-
11, pp. 859–66.                                       pling Distribution of Ordinary Least Squares
   Meyer, Bruce D.   1995. “Natural and Quasi-
                                                      and Two-Stage Least Squares Estimators.”  Jour-
Experiments in Economics.”    Journal of Business
                                                      nal of the American Statistical Association. 64:327,
and Economic Statistics. 13:2, pp. 151–61.
                                                      pp. 923–37.
   Meyer, Bruce D., W. Kip Viscusi and David L.
                                                        Sawa, Takamitsu.  1973. “An Almost Unbiased
Durbin.  1995. “Workers’ Compensation and In-
                                                      Estimator in Simultaneous Equations Systems.”
jury Duration: Evidence from  a Natural Experi-
                                                      International Economic Review. 14:1, pp. 97–106.
ment.”  American Economic Review. June, 85:3, pp.
                                                        Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock.   1997.
322–40.
   Morgan, Mary S.   1990. The History of Econo-      “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
metric Ideas. Cambridge: Cambridge University         Instruments.” Econometrica. 65:3, pp. 557–86.
Press.                                                  Theil, H. 1953. “Repeated Least Squares Ap-
   Nagar, A. L.  1959. “The Bias and Moment           plied to  Complete   Equation   Systems.” The
Matrix of the General  k-Class Estimators of the      Hague: Central Planning Bureau.
Parameters in Simultaneous Equations.”   Econo-         van der Klaauw, Wilbert.   1996. “A Regres-
metrica. October, 27, pp. 575–95.                     sion-Discontinuity Evaluation of the Effect of
   Permutt, Thomas and J. Richard Hebel.  1989.       Financial Aid Offers on College Enrollment.”
“Simultaneous Equation Estimation in a Clinical       Mimeo, Department of Economics, New York
Trial of the Effect of Smoking on Birth Weight.”      University.
Biometrics. June, 45, pp. 619–22.                       Wald, Abraham.  1940. “The Fitting of Straight
   Powers, Donald E. and Spencer S. Swinton.          Lines if Both Variables are Subject to Error.”
1984. “Effects of Self-Study for Coachable Test       Annals of Mathematical Statistics. 11, pp. 284–300.
Item  Types.”  Journal of Educational Psychology.       Wright, Phillip G. 1928. The Tariff on Animal
April, 76:2, pp. 266–78.                              and Vegetable Oils. New York: MacMillan.